 

= e ——

Abdullah Ocalan

Manifesto for a
Democratic Civilization

STIVEY])
T A EH R E
and Disquised Kings

 
 
Abdullah Ocalan

Civilization

The Age of Masked Gods and Disquised Kings

Manifesto for a Democratic Civilization

Volume |

& .

International Initiative Edition

 

new-compass.net

   
 
Civilization: The Age of Masked Gods and Disquised Kings
Manifesto for a Democratic Civilization: Volume |

2015 © International Initiative Edition

Second Printing, 2015

ISBN 978-82-93064-42-8
ISBN 978-82-93064-43-5 (ebook)

Original title: Uygarlik: Maskeli Tanrilar ve Ortiik Krallar Cagi,
Demokratik Uygarlik Manifestosu, Birinci Kitap

Translation: Havin Guneser

Edited by: Riekie Harm and Arjen Harm

Published by New Compass Press
Grenmarsvegen 12

N-3912 Porsgrunn

Norway

new-compass.net

And:

International Initiative Edition

“Freedom for Abdullah Ocalan—Peace in Kurdistan”
P.0.Box 100 511

D-50445 Cologne

Germany

freedom-for-ocalan.com
info@freedom-for-ocalan.com

Design and layout by Eirik Eiglad
Cover Artwork: Ayse Kazcl, “Unnamed,” detail.

 
Contents

Volume |

Editorial Note by International Initiative 7

Preface by David Graeber 11

Introduction 21
section 1: On Method and the Regime of Truth 32
Section 2: The Main Sources of Civilization 70

Section 3: Urban Civilized Society 94

Notes 199
Index 208

 
Publications by Abdullah Ocalan in English

Prison Writings:
Il The Road Map to Negotiations (Mesopotamien, 2011)

Il The PKK and the Kurdish Question in the 21st Century (Transmedia, 2011)
I: The Roots of Givilisation (Pluto, 2007)

Declaration on the Democratic Solution of the Kurdish Question (Mesopotamien, 1999)

Pamphlets:

Liberating Life: Woman’s Revolution (2013)
Democratic Confederalism (2011)

War and Peace in Kurdistan (2008)

The Third Domain: Reconstructing Liberation (2003)

B i i -

 
Editorial Note

By International Initiative

We are happy to publish the first of five volumes of what the author
describes as his most important work. The publication of this book
occurs in a period when hopes for a peaceful resolution to the Kurdish
Question have been rekindled.

During the 10 years in which we have published Ocalan’s prison writings
in English, his publicly acknowledged position has changed considerably.
After his death sentence was handed down in 1999, few non-Kurds
believed that he would ever again play a significant role in Kurdish politics.
We firmly believed, however, as we stated in our founding document,
that Ocalan “is still regarded as the undisputed leader by a majority of the
Kurdish people,” and that “it seems reasonable to assume that the solution
of the Kurdish question in Turkey will be closely linked to his fate in the
future. Many Kurds see him as a safeguard for peace and democratization.”

After his imprisonment, Ocalan intensified his efforts to find a lasting
solution to the Kurdish issue, even in those years when the conflict did not
make headlines. His perseverance and willingness to search for creative

/
Manifesto for a Democratic Civilization

solutions has brought him the deep respect even of his opponents, the
officials of the Turkish state that hold him captive. During those years, he
emerged as the uncontested leader of negotiations for the Kurdish side
in what is called the “solution process.” Now he is widely regarded as one .!
of the most important driving forces for peace and democratization in
Turkey and Kurdistan.

During these last months, there has been tangible movement in
the talks between Ocalan, the PKK, and the Turkish state. The Turkish
government is now closer than ever to entering into actual negotiations
with Ocalan and the PKK. While the whole process is still tenuous and
fragile, hope is again blossoming this spring. |

Paradoxically, Ocalan, like the other prisoners on Imrali Island, is
still held in solitary confinement. Despite ongoing talks with different
government bodies, he has not been allowed to see his lawyers since June
2011. He is still not able to write or receive letters, or to make any phoné-
calls. The paradox of a negotiation leader in isolation is still not resolved.

The conditions of solitary confinement are harsh for a thinker like
Ocalan. At times, isolation meant that he did not even have pen or
paper, and that he was not allowed to have any books in the cell. These
limitations did not stop him from penning down his thoughts. Ocalan
authors his hand-written manuscripts in one go. Afterwards, he does not
have the opportunity to revise them or to look at the typed manuscripts.
Due to these conditions he is unable to cite his sources. Most of the
footnotes to this text have therefore been added by the editors and
translator. We have done so to the best of our knowledge, but may have
missed some allusions and implicit references. Some comments in the
text have also been moved to footnotes where deemed necessary. Most
of the difficulties in translating and editing were due to the fact it was
impossible to communicate with the author.

Despite these limitations, Ocalan’s writings have broad appeal and a
huge practical impact. His books reach a wide readership in Kurdistan
and elsewhere, and they inspire countless people to struggle for freedom’
and a better society. Recently—and very visibly—the revolutionary
changes in Rojava and the resistance in Kobané have been spurred by
Ocalan’s concepts and ideas.

 
Editorial Note

We are confident that the years ahead will see further progress on the
road to peace and freedom. In a worldwide signature campaign, activists
recently collected 10,328,623 signatures for “Freedom for Abdullah
Ocalan and the political prisoners in Turkey.” This demand is absolutely
necessary for the peace process. As Nelson Mandela famously stated
while he was in prison: “Only free men can negotiate. A prisoner cannot
enter into contracts” We are certain that the demand for Abdullah
Ocalan’s freedom will ring ever louder—until it is finally met, and he can

join his friends and comrades in the quest to build a truly democratic
civilization.

International Initiative

“Freedom for Abdullah Ocalan-Peace in Kurdistan”
Cologne, March 2015

 
     

3 : - A -II I; *‘F
il WINE-ENE Y " A

i oy "_
tr “."!.' ]

O LS ‘ﬂ' ":I g i

.
'lll-:ﬁ:;!'.Im‘I" A :"‘Fu B

| .1“_ "ﬁ

i 4

e
Preface

By David Graeber

Marx believed it was imagination that made us human: unlike bees,
architects first imagine the houses they would like to build, and only
then set about actually constructing them. In a sense, the great question
driving all revolutionary thought is simply this: if we can do this with
our houses, why can’t we do it with the social order as a whole? Because
after all, how many of us, were we to simply imagine a society we would
like to live in, would come up with anything remotely like the ones
that currently exist? Yet almost every serious effort to proceed like the
architect, to simply imagine what a just society should be like, and then
set about creating it, seems to lead to frustration or disaster.

One might well argue that this is why we have social theory. The very
idea of a social science is born from the ruins of revolutionary projects.
We imagine the social equivalents of floating palaces and Tatlin’s Towers,
we try to build them, and find ourselves watching in dismay as they crash
and crumble all around us. Surely, there must be some social equivalents
to the laws of physics and gravitation that we were unaware of. As the

) : l
Manifesto for a Democratic Civilization

positivists argued in the wake of the French revolution, or Marx when
he wrote Capital irywake of the failed revolutions of 1848, perhaps if we
understood those laws, we can also understand how to avoid such pitfalls
in the future. Yet every attempt to apply such a scientific approach to
human society—whether by right or left, whether it takes the form of
neoclassical economics or historical materialism—has proved if anything
even more disastrous.

One problem—at least, this is what a lot of revolutionaries around
the world began to realize by the 1990s—is that we were working with a
decidedly limited notion of imagination. After all, even architects don't
build their designs out of nothing, and when they do, most would prefer
not to live in the sort of structures they create. And some of most of the
most vital, most creative, most imaginative revolutionary movements
of the dawn of the new millennium—the Zapatistas of Chiapas are
only the most obvious, perhaps—have been those that, simultaneously,
root themselves most strongly in a deep traditional past. There was a
growing recognition, in revolutionary circles, that freedom, tradition,
and the imagination have always been—and presumably, always will be,
entangled in one another in ways that we do not completely understand.
Our theoretical tools are inadequate.

Perhaps the only thing we can do at this point is to return to the past
and start over.

In such circumstances, one might say, the more ambitious the thinker, the
further back into the past one is likely to reach. If so, Ocalan’s work, over
the last fifteen years of his captivity, has been nothing if not ambitious,
True, he carefully avoids taking on the role of the prophet. The latter would
be easy enough, under the circumstances: to speak ex cathedra in epochal

declarations like some latter-day Zarathustra. Clearly he does not wish to

do this. At the same time, a radical by temperament, neither does he want
to sit at anybody else’s feet. He is never quite satisfied even with the thi

he most admires—Bookchin, Braudel, Foucault; rather, he wishes to speak,
as a self-proclaimed amateur, about a history and social science that does
not currently exist, but itself, perhaps, can only be imagined. What would
sociology of freedom actually be like? One can only guess. Surely, exis

{
|

 
Preface by David Graeber

onfined itself above all to those dimensions of social life
in which we are not free, in which we can at least imagine that our actions
are predetermined

Above all else, Ocalan’s intellectual project is driven by a recognition
that the revolutionary left’s embrace of positivism, the notion that it
would even be possible to create this sort of science of society, has been
the “disease of modernity,” the religion of its technocrats and officials,
and, for the revolutionary left, an unmitigated disaster—since it means

nothing to those classes that actually create things:

 
 
  

social theory has

forces beyond our control.

It is with pain and anger that I have to admit that the noble struggle that has
raged for the past one hundred and fifty years was carried out on the basis of a
vulgar, materialist positivism doomed to failure. The class struggle underlies
this approach. However, the class—contrary to what they believe—is not
the workers and laborers resisting enslavement, but the petit bourgeoisie
who has long ago surrendered and became part of modernity. Positivism
is the ideology that has formed this class’s perception and underlies its

meaningless reaction against capitalism.

Even worse, such an ideology ensures any revolutionary experiment can
only be instantly reincorporated into the logic of capitalist modernity, as
past revolutions have invariably done.

How does one begin to go about developing an alternative—one that
would do justice to the sense of meaning, mystery, creativity, even divinity,
that escapes the calculations of the traders and bureaucrats, but so clearly
informs the daily existence of the majority of the laboring classes of this
earth? We can only begin by turning back to history, to try to understand
how this situation came about to begin with. But this, in turn, means that
to a certain extent, we must be dealing in myth. I should hasten to add:
here I mean myth not in its (positivist) colloquial sense of “story that isn’t
true,” but rather, in the sense that any historical account that doesn’t simply
describe events but organizes them in such a way to tell a larger, meaningful
story, thus necessarily takes on a mythic character. If your history is not in
some sense mythic, then it's meaningless. In this sense, there’s obviously
nothing wrong with creating myths—it’s hard to imagine how an effective

13
Bt
Preface by David Graeber

lacked any real social structure at all. Things began to go downhill with
the invention of agriculture, which created the possibility of storable
surpluses and invidious distinctions of property, but the real fundamental
break came with the emergence of cities, and hence, civilization—that is,
“civilization” in the literal sense, which simply means people living in
cities. The concentration of population and resources urbanism made
possible was held to inevitably also mean the rise of ruling classes capable
of seizing control of those surpluses, hence, states, slavery, conquering
armies, ecological devastation, but also, at the same time, writing,
science, philosophy, and organized religion. Civilization thus came as a
package. One could embrace it as inevitable, accept violent inequalities as
the price of human progress, or one could dream of someday returning
to some new version of the old Edenic state—either by revolutionary
transformation, technological progress, or, in some radical versions, by
encouraging industrial collapse and returning to being actual hunter/
gatherers again. But civilization itself was a single entity, the inevitable
outgrowth of the original sin of domesticating animals and plants, and its
essence could not be modified, just embraced, or rejected.

The other story was quite different. Call it the Myth of the Aryan
invaders. Here the story begins: once upon a time, there was a matriarchal
civilization that stretched across the Fertile Crescent and beyond. In just
about all hunter/gatherer societies, women are the experts in plant life;
logically, then, it was assumed that women must have invented agriculture,
and that this is the reason for the extraordinary emphasis on goddess-
figures, and representations of powerful women more generally, during
the first five thousand years or so of agrarian life. Here the rise of cities was
not considered to be inherently problematic—Minoan Crete, a Bronze-
Age urban civilization whose language we cannot read, but whose art lacks
any representations of male figures of authority of any kind—was often
held out as the peaceful, graceful, artistic culmination of this Neolithic
matriarchal order. The real point of rupture came not with the rise of cities
but with the incursions of patriarchal, nomadic or semi-nomadic invaders,
such as the Semitic tribes who descended on the Tigris and Euphrates
from the surrounding deserts, but even more, the Indo-European or Aryan
cattle-people who were assumed to have spread out somewhere in what's

15

 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
  
  
  
  
  
 

Manifesto for a Democratic Civilization

now Southern Russia to lands as far away as Ireland and the Ganges valley,
bringing their languages, their warrior aristocracies, their heroic epics, and
sacrificial ritual. Again, one could identify with either side. For many poets,
romantics, revolutionaries, and feminists, this was the wistful dream of a
lost, pacifistic, collectivist paradise. Imperialists tended to turn the whole
story on its head: British colonial officials, for instance, were notorious for
trying to identify such “manly warrior races” to favor, over the supposedly
passive, “effeminate” peasants they were forced to administer. And as in
so many things, the Nazis simply applied colonial logic back to Europe
again. Hitler, notoriously, identified entirely with the patriarchal invaders,
reframing it as the overcoming of inferior womanly stock by their virile
natural overlords.

What Ocalan is doing here is taking the same pieces and putting them
together in quite a different way. In doing so, he is taking the lead from
the unique situation of his native Kurdistan, in the mountainous northern
fringes of that very Fertile Crescent where agriculture seems to have first
emerged. Noting that “Ari” in Kurdish means “related to earth, place, field,"
he argues that the original Indo-Europeans, or “Aryans,” were not pastoral
invaders at all, but the inventors of agriculture, and of the Neolithic '
culture which effectively created much of the everyday life we still take
for granted, our most basic habits in terms of food, shelter, our sense of
spirituality and community. This was a revolutionary transformation of
human life and as Ocalan stresses, it was a revolution created above all by
women free of patriarchal authority. Such was its obvious appeal that t
spread across the world, often taking Indo-European languages with it, not
by migration, but by the sheer power of example, and the cosmopolitan
flow of individuals and hospitality that this new and largely peace A
agrarian world made possible. The counterforce here is not the nomac
but again, the rise of cities, and particularly the ideological ground laid by
the Sumerian priesthood, who managed to introduce the subordination ¢
women, and the seeds of the state, mystifying ideology, the factory syster
and the brothel, all at the same time. The predatory elites, often of nomac
extraction, only then imposed themselves on a structure that alreac
existed, ensuring that the rest of history would also be marked by endl
spectacular, pointless, wars,

16
Preface by David Graeber

This is what Ocalan calls “civilization”—an order that presents itself
as gentility, moderation, legality, and reason, but whose actual essence
is rape, terror, treachery, cynicism, and war. Much of the conflict of the
last five thousand years has been between the violence of this originally
urban system of human exploitation, and the values that still exist in the
enduring Neolithic bedrock of our collective existence. Here his analysis
of the role of ideology—and particularly, religion—takes a number of
surprising turns.

It is precisely—if paradoxically—because of the revolutionary nature
of social change that the logic of revealed religions make intuitive sense.
Rather than the positivist sensibilities which—for all its disavowals since
the crash of Fabian dreams in the First World War—still assumes history
is mainly characterized by progress, that social change is normal and
relatively incremental and benevolent phenomenon—since it really can't
imagine anything else, real history is more typically marked by intense
moments of social imagination, the creation of patterns of life that then
doggedly remain with us, in relatively the same form, for millennia
thereafter. The Neolithic revolution, as Gordon Childe originally dubbed
it, involved the invention of patterns of life—everything from techniques
of animal husbandry or putting cheese on bread to the habits of sitting
on pillows or chairs—that remained, afterwards, fixtures of human
existence. The same is true of our basic social categories like domestic
life, art, politics, religion: “generally speaking, the social realities created
in the Fertile Crescent during the Neolithic are still in existence today.” In
that sense we are all still living in the Neolithic. What the holy books like
the Avesta, the Bible or Koran teach, then—that the truths that underpin
our lives were the product of moments of divine revelation long ago—
appeal to ordinary farmers, workmen and tradespeople not because they
mystify the conditions of their existence, or not primarily so; rather,
they make intuitive sense because, in many very real ways, what they
are saying is true—or more true than the alternate rationalist theology
of the bureaucrats. In a larger sense, religion, ideology, “metaphysics,”
becomes both the domain in which one can speak truths that cannot
be expressed otherwise, but also a battlefield for struggles over meaning
whose political implications could not be more profound. What is one

17
M’
-y

 

Manifesto for a Democratic Civilization

to make of the prominence of Mother Goddess figures like Ishtar or
Cybele in times of patriarchal domination? Are they not, Ocalan argues,
both expressions of, and weapons in, battles over the meaning of gender
relations, and the actual power of real-life men and women, whose very
existence might otherwise have been entirely lost?

Academics are snobbish creatures, they tend to dismiss anyone infringing
on their territory unless they can be reduced to an object of study in their
own right. No doubt many will object: how much of this really stands up?
Considering the circumstances under which the book was written, I'd say
the achievement here is quite impressive. Abdullah Ocalan seems to have
done a better job writing with the extremely limited resources allowed him
by his jailers than authors like Francis Fukuyama or Jared Diamond did
with access to the world’s finest research libraries. True, much of the picture
defies the current wisdom of professional archeologists, anthropologists,
and historians. But often this is a good thing, and anyway, this wisdom is
itself in a process of continual transformation. The past is always changing.
The one thing we can be sure of is that fifty years from now, much that is
now accepted without question will have gone by the boards.

Still, in one way, this study does smack up against what has been a
particular point of scholarly resistance when it embraces the idea of early
matriarchy. Most theories ebb and flow with intellectual fashion; there’s a
generational pattern where theories once widely embraced (Karl Polanyi
or Moses Finley’s ideas of the ancient economy are nice examples) come
to be universally rejected, then once again revived. In the case of theories
of matriarchy, or even ones that granted women a uniquely exalted status
in Neolithic societies, this has not happened. To even speak of such
matters has become something of a taboo. In part, no doubt, it is because
the idea continues to be so eagerly embraced by precisely the tendencies
within feminism that academics tend to take least seriously, but even so,
resistance is so stubborn it’s hard to avoid the conclusion there’s some
kind of profound patriarchal bias here at play.

(It is a telling sign that the most common objections here make
little logical sense. The most common {s an appeal to the ethnographic
record: while Neolithic and Chalcolithic art,

 
 
Preface by David Graeber

does seem to represent a social order in which women hold almost all
authoritative positions, there is little or no evidence for similar societies
in the anthropological literature. True. But the ethnographic record also
contains no evidence for democratically organized city-states like ancient
Athens, and we know that they existed, indeed, that such city-states were
fairly common in the late Iron Age, before largely disappearing around
300 BCE. But even if one does insist on ethnographic parallels, the logic
doesn’t work. Because another common argument is that the existence
of a material culture in which virtually all representations of powerful
figures are female demonstrates nothing in itself, since these might simply
‘be mythological scenes, and actual social life might have been organized
entirely differently. However, no one has ever managed to produce an
example of a patriarchal society in which artistic representations focus
nearly exclusively on images of powerful women, mythical or otherwise,
either. So either way, we are dealing with something ethnographically
unprecedented. The fact that almost all scholars, however, take that to
mean we must conclude that men were running things, strikes me as a
clear an example of patriarchal bias as it is possible to find.)

Like anthropologists, archeologists and historians have developed the
annoying habit of writing only for each other. Most don't even write
anything that would be meaningful for:scholars in other disciplines,
let alone for anyone outside the academy. This is unfortunate, because
in recent decades, information has begun to accumulate that could,
potentially, throw all our received understandings into disarray. Almost
all the key assumptions of the civilizational narrative we have been
telling, in one way or another, since the time of Rousseau, appear to be
based on false assumptions—ones that are simply factually incorrect.
Hunter/gatherers for instance do not live exclusively in tiny bands, and
they are not necessarily all that egalitarian (many seem to have had
seasonal patterns of creating hierarchies, and then tearing them down
again.) Early cities, in contrast, were often startling egalitarian. Before the
birth of the ziggurat system to which Ocalan draws attention, there was
perhaps a millennium of egalitarian urbanism about which we know very
little. But the implications are potentially extraordinary—particularly

19
M"

o,'
Manifesto for a Democratic Civilization

because, once you know what to look for, egalitarian experiments begin
to appear everywhere across human history. “Civilization” or even what
we call “the state” are not single entities that come as a package, take it
or leave it, but uncomfortable amalgams of elements that may now be
in the process of drifting apart. All of these processes of rethinking will
have enormous political implications. In some areas I suspect it will soon
be evident that we have been asking all the wrong questions. To take just
one example: It is almost universally assumed that creating equality or
democracy in a small group is relatively easy, but that to operate on a
larger scale would create enormous difficulties. It’s becoming clear that
this simply isn't true. Egalitarian cities, even regional confederacies, are
historically commonplace. Egalitarian households are not. It’s the small
scale, the level of gender relations, household servitude, the kind of
relations that contain at once the deepest forms of structural violence
and the greatest intimacy, where the most difficult work of creating a free
society will have to take place.

In this context, it seems to me that Ocalan is asking precisely the right
questions, or many of them, at a moment when doing so could hardly be
more important. Let us only hope that as political movements learn the
lessons of history, as new social theories are born, as they will inevitably
be, and as our knowledge of the past is likewise revolutionized, and that
the author of this book will be released from his present captivity and

able to participate as a free man.

 
Introduction

After the betrayal of friendship by the Greek nation-state and her
relationship with the Republic of Turkey being added to the equation
of interests, I was handed over to the USA (thus, the CIA). When I was
first taken to the Imrali Prison, I was met by the then president of the
European Committee for the Prevention of Torture (CPT), Silvia Casale.
She said, “You will stay in this prison and we shall try to find some kind
of solution under the supervision of the Council of Europe.” I was thus
chained to the rocks of Imrali; doomed to live a destiny more severe than
that of the mythological Prometheus.

It is important to discuss how and why I left Syria, as this started the
chain of events that eventually led to my abduction. My departure from
Syria resulted from the contradiction that arose yet again from the value I
put on friendship and Israel’s Kurdish policies. After its founding, shortly
after World Word I, Israel tried to patronage the Kurdish issue but was
50 sensitive that she had no tolerance for the alternative solution to the
Kurdish issue proposed by our movement that became more influential.

21

h*—-#
L

Manifesto for a Democratic Civilization

Our proposed atternative did not serve the interest of Israel. I should not,
howéver,-deny their efforts; MOSSAD did indirectly invite me to work
with them on their own solution. But I was not open to, nor desired,
this—neither politically nor morally.

On the other hand, the Syrian-Arab government never wished to
surpass their tactical alliance with the PKK leadership. An alliance with
the PKK'had been part of Syria’s answer to the threats that had been coming
from Turkey since 1958 and Turkey’s extreme pro-Israel tendencies.! The
PKK did not object to such a tactical relationship. (No one wanted to see
that this relationship could lead to an alternative Kurdish policy; thus, the
efforts of the Turkish administrations were ineffective.) But, seeing that
Hafez al-Assad obtained the Syrian leadership due to the power struggle
between the USA and the USSR, Syria was in no position to maintain any
of its tactical alliances after the disintegration of the Soviet Union.

Even this short reminder shows that, although political pressure by the
USA and military pressure by Turkey undoubtedly played a role, the real
power that forced me out of Syria was Israel. It should not be forgotten
that Israel and Turkey already had clandestine agreements in the 1950s,
and with the second “anti-terror” agreement of 1996 the anti-PKK alliance
between the USA, Israel and the Turkish Republic was complete.?

Another critical factor was the anti-PKK coalition which the Turkish
Republic had entered into with the Patriotic Union of Kurdistan (PUK)
and the Kurdistan Democratic Party (KDP), both of whom already had
relations with the USA and Israel; in other words, with the Kurdish
Federal Assembly and its administration established in 1992.

The combination of all these adverse factors led me to leave Syria in
1998. Besides, I knew that it was time to leave. I had already been in Syria
too long, lured by the political developments around Kurdistan and
the friendship that I had hoped would result in strategic cooperation.
I have to admit that high-ranking officials in the Syrian government
had warned me about its disadvantages. Yet, I did not want to give up
my belief in the power of friendship and cooperation between peoples.
For the same reason I left Syria for Greece. I wanted to develop ties of
friendship with the Greek people, to learn from its classical culture and
its tragic history. |

N

G

 
Introduction

My only alternative was to go off into the mountains of Kurdistan.
Two factors made me decide to not do this. First, my presence would
attract massive military force. This would lead to serious damage to the
civilians in the area and my comrades; it could also lead to the armed
struggle becoming the exclusive means of obtaining a solution for the
Kurdish question. Second, it was a pressing need to educate the youth
joining our organization.

In short, the official and unofficial claims in Turkey of “we have him
cornered” and “see the results we have obtained” do not altogether reflect
reality. Notwithstanding this, Turkey is still trying to ensnare Iran and
[raq in the same way it did Syria. The outcome of Turkey’s alliance with
Syria and Iran can also not be predicted. If the antagonisms between
the USA, EU, Israel, Iran, Russia and China intensify, will the Turkish
Republic be ready for the consequences?

My three-month peregrination between Athens, Moscow and Rome
was not without value, though. This adventure led me to understand
the essence of capitalist modernity—the basis on which this defense
is built—despite its many masks and disguises. If not for this insight, I
would either have been a primitive nationalist aspiring for a nation-state,
or I would have ended up in a classical left-wing movement. Thus, my
change in thought and policy can be ascribed to this forced adventure.

It has now become clear to me: The real power of capitalist modernity is
not its money or its weapons; its real power lies in its ability to suffocate all
utopias—including the socialist utopia which is the last and the most powerful
of all—with its liberalism. Unless this power of liberalism is analyzed
thoroughly, no ideology will escape being the humble servant of capitalism.
There is hardly anyone who analyzed capitalism as comprehensively as
Marx did, or focused on the state and revolution as much as Lenin did.
However, it has become much clearer today that, despite claiming to be
its negation, the Marxist-Leninist tradition’s contribution to capitalism in
terms of material and meaning was significant.

To help channel humanity into its natural stream, we need to understand
the individual and the society brought about by liberalism. (I shall explain
this in full detail later.) Moreover, for me to understand my own fate, I
need to understand the capitalist modernity behind the representative of

23
_—_—-—-——'—d
Manifesto for a Democratic Civilization

the Council of Europe who welcomed me to the Imrali Prison. The whole
odyssey was planned by Israel, the USA, EU, and a disintegrated Soviet
Russia. The Syrian, Greek and Turkish governments had a secondary
role; they only lent a helping, bureaucratic hand.” The way I was captured
demonstrated that the capitalist modernity, of which the USA is the world
leader, is a system with no inhibition to oppress and abuse.

It is not as if I did not understand the way the Turkish state operated. On
the contrary. At the time, there existed a death decree for Kurdishness. T had a
choice: I was either going to resist—to not give up my honor, my humanness,
my Kurdishness—or I was going to deny who I am and vanish into obscure
captivity. In the beginning I was alone and very weak, but I resisted. I am not
about to enter into a discourse on this; those who have witnessed it will attest
that I have struggled well. I do not feel any anger either.

But I am angry that I could not transcend the concepts and the
ideology underlying the Western capitalist system. The system we are
confronted with is supposedly based on human rights. In reality though,
it is an elite group manipulating and exploiting the rest of humanity and
nature, unleashing war whenever that is in their interest. They are the
ones dictating the roles the rest of humanity must play.

Although the society I was born into has not really progressed
beyond Neolithic culture, it has readily integrated the negative effects of
the different stages of civilization. Capitalist modernity combined with
the strictest and most conservative traditions of the Middle East resulted
in our society being besieged by the ideal of ethnic nationalism and
nation-statehood. This is in fact the dominant ideology in our society
and the most difficult to disentangle ourselves from. Combined with
the ever-present possibility for violence, this ideal enslaves us all in an
opportunity-less life before even being born. Nevertheless, I did not leave
Turkey in the cause of “glorious resistance.” I was in fact looking for some
breathing space for the resolution of the national question to which we
were devoted through some dogmatic left-wing analysis. The PKK stood
no chance of surviving in the Middle East if it did not take advantage
of the vacuums in the system. Still, the fact that the PKK has been able
to wage an armed struggle was important because of the implications
thereof. For the Kurds it has meant an ' gation, The fact

e

"

    
 

Introduction

that the Kurds were able to progressively free themselves from the classic
collaborators meant that, for the first time, the alternative of freedom had
been felt and understood.

This is exactly why this movement has never been embraced by the so-
called “modern” nation-states (states that in reality resemble the despotic
regimes of medieval times); why the Kurdish collaborators, the nation-
states of the region, and the imperialist world leaders colluded in branding
the PKK a “terrorist organization.” The fallacy that the conquering ideology
of Islam and the nationalist ideology of liberalism had wiped out and
excluded the Kurds from history was destroyed by the free Kurd—a free
Kurdish individual and a free Kurdish society. In fact, it is not me but this
free Kurdishness that serves the sentence of solitary confinement in this
single-inmate island prison. That this sentence is not about the individual
Abdullah Ocalan is clear from the imprisonment policies implemented
daily during the nine years I have been in isolation on Imrali—they are not
the policies that are applied in the average Turkish prison.

I came to understand that Turkey cannot decide to either fight or to
make peace in its own name. The role that has been assigned to Turkey
is to be the vulgar gendarme, the watchdog and the prison guard of
all Middle Eastern peoples in order to make them more susceptible to
the oppression and exploitation of the capitalist system. Hence, stable
Turkish and Anatolian societies—both in and outside Europe—are of
critical importance to the system. Turkey’s relations with NATO and the
EU should be understood in terms of these policies.

The above should suffice to illustrate the impossibility of a meaningful
defense before the court without a deep understanding of capitalist
modernity. It should also be clear that a meaningful defense couldn’t be
constructed solely on the basis of law. A superficial political and strategic
approach will not expose why the “retrial” judgment of the court was not
implemented,* Such a retrial would also have had important implications
for clarifying what a free Kurdishness-solution would entail.

The Imrali trials were nothing but pretense. I responded to it with
my defense speech titled “Declaration on the Democratic Solution of the
Kurdish Question” and then later with the comprehensive submissions I
made to the European Court of Human Rights titled Roots of Civilisation.®

25

 
Manifesto for a Democratic Civilization

My work In Defense of a People was in essence an attempt to make true
democracy and justice understandable.® These defenses, however, aim
not only to problematize capitalist modernity and the need to surpass
this modernity; they also aim to determine the political system of
democratization and its link to freedom as an alternative solution.

Everything about the Imrali trial was a showcase and, to the finest
detail, was planned in advance—the date on which the judgment would
be announced, the choice of the judge, the duration of the trial and how
the media would be used. I was not given the opportunity to defend myself
properly. The whole plan was to use me as best as possible in relation to
the Kurdish question and all else had to serve this end. The Kenya ordeal
was nothing but a violation of European, Kenyan and Turkish law, and the
threat of the death penalty was held over me to attain political results. The
plan was to scare me. Under these circumstances the only thing I could
do was to make as big a political contribution as possible. For this reason
my defense rested on political argumentation. Besides, there was a need to
search for deep-rooted answers to the mistakes that led to this outcome.
This is what I tried to do. This was the only way to have a minimal role in
the game of the conspirators and to contribute to the freedom struggle.

I must admit that I expected that the European Court of Human
Rights would find my arrest to be unlawful. Only this verdict would have
led to a fair trial. But it was not made. The court later had no choice but
to determine that it was an unfair trial. After a prolonged wait for a fair
trial the Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe scandalously
agreed to close the case, probably in return for important political
concessions from the Turkish government. No one questioned the
Turkish government’s handling of the judgment of the court; in the name
of a retrial, Ankara 11th Assize Court and Istanbul 14th Assize Court
unilaterally upheld the previous judgment.” My defense lawyers have
taken this situation back before the European Court of Human Rights. It
will be interesting to see the Court’s stance towards its own judgment. I
had begun to prepare a proper defense for the retrial only to discover that
the trial would be nothing but a showcase.

- lalsocametoabetter understandingabout the degree of communication
and cooperation between the USA, EU li¢ In relation to

 
   
Introduction

the PKK, me, and the Kurdish question in general. Turkey, in return for
comprehensive economic concessions, was allowed to eliminate the Kurdish
question in Turkey and it seems that Turkey will conditionally support the
construction of the Kurdish Federal state in Iraq. It is clear that there was
much discussion to this end. In fact, concessions and cooperation with the
USA were conducted openly in the case of my arrest, the elimination of the
Kurdish question in Turkey and the declaration of the PKK as a “terrorist
organization.” The IMF and the EU’s Copenhagen Criteria are nothing
more than a pretext for disguising clandestine cooperation.

Frankly, I was not expecting such foul play and questionable attitude
on the part of the EU institutions. This outcome led me to deeply
question the human rights and democratic norms of the EU. I reached
the conclusion that the problems we face are very deeply rooted and thus
require equally deep solutions. Undoubtedly, the EU has a progressive
approach to human rights and democracy and offers hope to the rest of
the world. However, the capitalist modernity at its roots has tied it down
so firmly that one becomes pessimistic about its future.

The Russian revolutionaries believed that the victory of their
revolution was guaranteed if there would be revolution in at least a part
of Europe. But their expectations were not realized. On the contrary,
the European liberal counterrevolution caused the disintegration of not
only Soviet Russia but of the entire system it led. Europe takes the same
approach to the democratic revolutions of today. If we want to prevent a
similar fate for them, the European ideal of what constitutes democracy
could not be our sole model. In an age where global capital is so highly
developed, to pursue global democratization would be more realistic. In
a paradigm of global democratization, the democracy, human rights and
freedom of Europe would make a more meaningful contribution.

[ realized that, without a thorough and detailed analysis of capitalist
modernity as a basis for concepts like democratic republic, society and
nation, I would simply end up being superficial. However, I am confident
that my subsequent writings will contain the necessary depth. I plan to
develop these ideas in several books. |

I have broadly outlined why my “re-trial” did not take place, but there
is a need for a detailed analysis. In my previous defense, I took great care

2]
M
    

Manifesto for a Democratic Civilization

to uncover the origins of the main issues. Although excessive reductionism
can result in serious misinterpretation in our analysis of modernity, we
have to run the risks. I have tried to minimize the dangers presented by
reductionism by handling main sections in full.

Following on this foreword, is a discourse on method and the
regime of truth. Since method is the accepted way of analyzing and
investigating a specific issue, it should be beneficial to first define the
modus operandi employed in the past and the present. Disclosing the
underlying reasons for the positive and negative aspects of the various
approaches to method can only benefit our analysis. For any serious
discourse the issues of “what is truth” and “how can we arrive at truth”
need to be resolved. Therefore, I will deal with the issue of “how to best
reach the meaning of life” under the regime of truth. Here I will try to
expose objectivism and subjectivism together with some of the main
theorems that have captivated the human mentality.

Later on in the book I will make it clear that the questions involved
with the construction of fundamental categories cannot be detached from
time and location. The characteristics and formation of society are either
envisioned to be a chain of mere “historical events” or some abstract
storytelling as if these events have no location. As a result these social
perceptions lead to much deceitful rhetoric and demagogy. “Human life”
will be more meaningful if we base social realities on the time and space
of what is really important. We will also see that many of the notions and
theorems are nothing but speculation and deception. More concretely, I will
consider the historical and locational development of today’s civilization.

In the second volume, Capitalist Civilization: The Age of Unmasked
Gods and Naked Kings, 1 will try to display the birth of capitalism
and its detrimental impact on society. Although capitalism may look
very transparent, I will show how capitalism has used political power
and science to construct itself and how it has later subjugated them. I
will also show how a hegemonic vicious circle has been established
over our mentalities through the creation of ongoing conflict and
the employment of the scientism method, notions and theorems. I
will try to analyze its capacity to transform a vast variety of opposing
movements like social democracy, anarchism, national liberation, and

28 it

B e e e A o o e . e
Introduction

even Marxism into a tool that can be used for its own benefit. How was
it possible that commodification and exchange value that were scorned
by all societies became the new gods that later commanded society? How
was it possible that the limited number of kings who were disguised in
colorful clothes and had separate lives later multiplied themselves and
could no longer be differentiated from their subjects? If it proclaims
that it is a very scientific, powerful and material system then why are
societies at the brink of environmental and internal exhaustion? I will try
to answer these questions. I will also question the true role of scientific
categorization as it relates to nation-states in terms of its economic, social
structure and political institutions and how they add meaning to life or
make life meaningless. I will also attempt to clarify the role of liberalism,
nationalism and individualism.

In volume three, The Sociology of Freedom, 1 will examine how we
can achieve a utopian and free lifestyle. I will concentrate on the new
mentality necessary to arrive at the much talked about “free life.” The
capitalist modern forms have made the antagonistic dualism of death
and life meaningless and so doing it detaches life from all its magical and
poetic aspects and creates an era of perpetual death, similar to judgment
day. The alternative of utopian free life is neither a form of production
nor a society but a life that can be constructed daily by communities.

In the fourth volume I will concentrate solely on the Middle East in
the Age of Capitalism. I will not only evaluate what the fundamental
aspects are that make it possible for the Middle East to stay on its two feet
despite the two World Wars engineered by capitalism, but also question
why it has become one of the most problematic regions in the world. As
the location of what could be called the Third World War, what will its
probable future be? How can we interpret its resistance against capitalist
modernity? Can this region, which was once the cradle of civilization
but is now a cemetery, become the region that can make the transition to
free utopias? Could this region re-construct its sublime values in order
to deliver meaningful, enthralling and poetic “free lifestyles”? Will it at
the same time be able to break the material and scientific forms and idols
of the capitalist modernity in order to make free life possible? Will the
constitution of democratic administration methods, environmentally

29
L-A“.
Manifesto for a Democratic Civilization

friendly production groups and meaningful assemblies of wisdom be
attained? I will attempt to answer these fundamental questions.®

The plight of the Kurds remains tragic. The Kurds can be called a
nation that is not a nation. Nowhere will one find another nation,
another distinct human community, that has run away from—been
made to flee from—its own essential values. One cannot call them a weak
nation, a nation lacking the ability to fight: the nature of their land and
their hereditary characteristics have made them fierce fighters, and the
potential courage of the women and youth is very high. However, they
have been turned into such cowards that they have come to fear their
own shadows.

The overall situation in the Middle East might one day demand that
the USA will have to choose the Kurds as its new strategic ally in the
Middle East. Israel has a completely separate Kurdish project of its own.

However, it would be a mistake to see the role of the Kurds in this new
period of chaos as one of mere collaboration. The vast majority, who are
yearning to live a life of freedom, will find the champions to fulfill this
expectation. It has the potential to both leave behind its medieval way of
life and to escape the ideal of the nation-state of capitalist modernity—a :
system that has not given any nation the possibility to live a life of
freedom. Given the historical, geographical and hereditary features of
Kurdistan and the Kurds, democratic confederalism is the most suitable
political format. This form of governance also offers the best possibility
for attaining the ideals of freedom and equality. Besides, it will be spared
the problems that establishing a new nation-state will bring.

Hence, the Kurdistan Communities Union (Koma Civakén Kurdistan,
KCK) will be the entity with the role of resolving the problems with the
rigid nation-states that surround it. KCK can be the leading model for a
Middle Eastern democratic confederalism that will reunite those whose
free lives were destroyed by the nation-state wars imposed on the former
mosaic of the Middle Eastern peoples—the Arabs, Iranians, Turks, Kurds,
Armenians, Greeks, Jews, Caucasians and all the others who dream of a
free life and material comfort.

But should the present situation give rise to a democratic federal
republic from the chaos in Iraq, such a form of government can play

. - ]

 
Introduction

a leading role too. The “Third World War” of the capitalist modernity
is open-ended. The outcome will be determined by the efforts and
initiatives of the leading groups, of which the PKK is only one.

We can only surpass this system that feeds on a continuous state
of warfare within and outside the society by constituting meaningful
centers of resistance and justice against exploitation and power, and by
evermore embracing our utopia of freedom. All other paths seem to be
nothing but vicious circles.

I am writing under the conditions of total isolation on the island of
Imrali. Under these conditions, I was not able to do the research necessary
for the customary acknowledgement. But the works of the leaders of
humanity, who have contributed to the whole of human society, have

been a source of knowledge to me. It is not possible to list them all. I
dedicate this defense to those who have been and will be good friends
and comrades.

 
Section 1

On Method and
the Regime of Truth

In our quest to understand and live a meaningful life, humankind
throughout the ages has used three basic methods to obtain and interpret
knowledge, or “the truth,” namely the mythological, the religious, and the
scientific methods. In this regard, we can loosely define the concept method
as a particular approach and related forms of habit that lead to the desired
outcome (in this case, to understand and live a meaningful life) in the most
economic way. The fact that it has been tried out many times before and is
successful in yielding results extends credibility to a method.

The first method, encountered in the depths of history, is the
mythological approach. Nature is seen as animate, abundant with spirits.

In the light of recent scientific insights, the mythological approach
may seem less naive than once was thought. In my opinion, lifeless
and static methodological approaches are far less meaningful than
mythology. The mythological approach is environmentally oriented, free
of notions of fatalism and determinism and conducive to living life in
freedom. Its fundamental approach to life s one of harmony with nature,

A—-——‘

B
On Method and the Regime of Truth

This perception exalted and vivified all human groups up until the age of
the major religions. Myth, legend, and reverence for the sacred formed
the outlook of the Neolithic period in particular.

The fact that mythology seems to contradict objectivity does not
mean that meaningful interpretations cannot be deduced from its
content. On the contrary, one cannot fully understand history without
such interpretations. Seeing that humans had been living according to
the dictates of mythology for the greatest part of our history, interpreting
mythology is essential for understanding humanity.

What is more, there are indications that many of the current scientific
theories that are seen as the antipode of the mythological approach are
themselves nothing but mere mythology.

The mythological method should be given back the prestige it lost when
it was discredited by monotheistic religious dogma and by the scientific
method; methods alleging to bow to absolute laws. These mythologies—
related to utopian ideologies—cannot be discarded because the richness
of the human psyche cannot be reduced to a mathematical and analytical
mind, a mind that would be inconsistent with life itself. With a mind that
is nothing more than a calculator, how will we be able to understand and
interpret the psyches of the millions of different living beings, the movement
of subatomic particles, the immenseness of astronomic sizes? Mathematics
by itself is not sufficient to analyze these micro and macro universes.

The intuition of living beings cannot be underestimated. The meaning of
life that we are searching for may well be hidden in this intuition. We should
not think of intuition as something independent of the macro or the micro
universes but as a fundamental characteristic of the universe. It follows that
the mythological method cannot be insignificant; it may, indeed, contribute
as much to our understanding of the universe as the scientific method.

Occurring for the first time just before or just after the onset of
recorded history, the religious perception occupies the second longest
period in the history of humanity. The transition from mythological to
dogmatic religious perception is closely connected to the transition from
an egalitarian, classless society to a hierarchic society and the formation
of social classes. The relationship between the newly formed classes of the
exploited and the exploiters demanded indisputable dogmas. In order to

33
B
Manifesto for a Democratic Civilization

disguise and legitimize the exploitation and power of hierarchical and class
interests, these dogmas were endowed with “indisputable” characteristics
such as sacredness, being god’s infallible words, and immunity.

The dogmatic religious perception holds that the aim of life and the
path to the truth can only be found if one acts in accordance with the
Word of God, transcending nature and society. If not, life itself will be
slavery and the afterlife hell. In reality, the god is the despot exploiting
and dominating society. That this excessive masking of the god is nothing
but deception is evident if we consider that, at their onset, the despots
had named themselves “god-kings”; later they enforced their word as law,
presenting it as the absolute truth. As the oppression and exploitation
became deeply rooted, the dogmatic religious approach was constructed
as the social reality through which, for a very long time, humanity was
submitted to the slavery of the masked despots. In fact, one of the most
important aspects of the religious method is its legitimation of slave-like
submission and the establishment of the fatalistic perception. Without
this method, the terrible exploitative and ferocious wars waged by
humanity would not have been possible.

Creeds such as “live in accordance with the holy Word and divine
Law!” made it very easy to govern through the religious method. A
shepherd-herd dialectic was established. On the one hand, a passive
nature and society; on the other, a very active, transcendent ruler who
creates and makes all things possible. It is no exaggeration to say that
antiquity and the Middle Ages were governed through this method.

One of the most unfavorable aspects of the dogmatic method is that, |
instead of a living, evolving conception of nature, it brought about the
concept of a passive nature, a nature unable to act except under the
external command of the Almighty. This concept, in turn, led to the
natural acceptance of a similar mentality in the social arena.

The dogmatic religious method reached its peak in the Middle Ages,
especially in terms of its transcendent subjectiveness. The physical
world was nearly declared incomprehensible and ignored. The world
was considered a temporary stop in life, whereas the eternal ideals were
postulated as the ultimate form of life. Those who knew the dogmas and
clichés best were regarded as scholars and elevated to the highest ranks.

. ey
On Method and the Regime of Truth

This method, which in essence is anti-mythological, played the leading
role in confining life.

The positive aspect of the religious method is its improvement
of society’s morals. During this period and under this approach, the
distinction between good and evil was developed and absolute decrees
were imposed. This method revealed the flexibility of, and hence
the possibility to mold, the human mind. Without morality, neither
socialization nor government is possible. Undoubtedly, morality
is a metaphysical perception but this does not annul it or lessen its
importance. Humanity without morals either will cause the end of its
own species or the end of an inhabitable environment. In fact, it is the
considerable decay of morality in the post-religious era that has brought
the environment to the brink of disaster.

The prophetic approach of the major religions have employed and
developed the dogmatic method, especially in Zoroastrianism where
its fundamental philosophy—good and evil—was held akin to light
and darkness. These religions are the founders of metaphysical morals.
However, the dogmatic method has influenced not only the major
religions but also classical Greek thought, where a restricted use of
dialectics and objectivity reigned. The idealism of Aristotle and Plato
was the strongest anchor of the dogmatic religious method during the
Middle Ages. Plato, the greatest philosopher—indeed the creator—of
idealism, was revered as a prophet during the Middle Ages. But morality
reached its climax with Zoroaster, Confucius, and Socrates. These sages
led humanity to great moral advancement.

The concept of scientific method has played an important role in
capitalism becoming a world system. In this new approach (pioneered
by Roger and Francis Bacon, and Descartes) a careful distinction is made
between subject and object, whereas in the dogmatic method of the
Middle Ages there was no room for such a distinction.

Western Europe emerged with the Renaissance when the way for a
new era was paved through the Reformation and Enlightenment. The
subjectiveness of the human being and the objectiveness of the world
became the two fundamental factors in life. Hence, the dogmatic method
based on the Word of God--along with morality—lost its supremacy.

35
M
Manifesto for a Democratic Civilization

The disguised kings and masked gods were replaced by naked kings and |
unmasked gods. The underlying urge now is capitalistic exploitation,
which is necessary to make profits. The terrible exploitation humanity
and nature would encounter in this process demanded a radical change
in society’s perception. The need for profits is thus the underlying reason
for the spread of the new scientific method.

But society did not so easily adopt the new morality—society can only
be reconstructed through an enormous change in thought-pattern and
mentality. This is where the new methodology comes into play—to find the
truth. It is well known that Descartes went through a radical transformation
and that his skepticism about everything which led him to arrive at “I
think, therefore I am.” While Descartes paved the way for the individual
to think independently, Roger and Francis Bacon’s work on the concept of
objectivity allowed the “object” to be at the disposal of the individual.

The concept of objectivity as employed in the scientific method entails

. T il . * i i it it it T S i

that nature as a whole—that is, animate and inanimate nature including
the human body but excluding analytical thought—is defined as an object.
This new interpretation plays a key role in capitalism’s exploitation and
domination of nature and society. The mental transformation needed for
the acceptance of this would have been impossible, were the distinction
between subject and object not legitimized and widely accepted. The conflict
between the church and science should not be seen iaurely as a contention
for “the truth”—mighty social struggles are fought beneath the surface. One
way to interpret this is as the contention between the old society, charged
with morality, and the nakedly capitalistic society that wishes to strip itself
off these moral covers. What we have here is a new, capitalist, social project
that wishes to fully expose society to exploitation and domination and the
“objective approach” is the key notion in this project.

While subject is the most legitimate factor of analytical thought, object
is the physical element open to contemplation. There is not a single value
that “analytical thought” will not tamper with in the name of objectivity.
Not only human labor but animate and inanimate nature as a whole can be
taken possession of and put through any examination or investigation in
order to gain the right to its exploitation and domination, The individual
citizen, nation or state becomes the fundamental subject, locked in ongoing

16 | II| X

 
On Method and the Regime of Truth

struggle against the object of nature and society. These new, unmasked
gods have been endowed with unlimited power—from committing
genocide to rendering the environment uninhabitable. The Leviathan
of old has become mad and there is no object that it will not subjugate.
The objective approach cannot be perceived as an innocent notion of the
scientific method—such a perception can only lead to enormous disasters,
conflicts, and massacres more ruthless than those of the Inquisition.

The alleged scientific method is instrumental for contemporary class
division and the main reason for the dysfunction and failure of contemporary
social sciences. In my opinion, the objective scientific method played a
determining role in the failure of scientific socialism, which I once regarded
as the most far-reaching approach of the social sciences.

Scientific socialism collapsed from within and the systems derived
from it transformed themselves from state capitalist institutions to
private capitalist institutions. This was due to the scientific method and
its fundamental concept of objectivity. I shall discuss this later in more
detail but let me just say here that I have never for a moment doubted
the good intentions, beliefs and efforts of those who contributed to the
struggle for socialism.

All scientific structures that regard the distinction between subject
and object as fundamental also assert the right to freedom—in some cases
even to the extent that they claim not to be bound by any social values.
These claims have resulted in enormous distortions by science. The level
of integration between science and the ruling system is alarming. The
world of science has become the power that constructs, legitimizes, and
protects the system’s methods and contents. The scientific method of the
capitalist age and the sciences based on it thus have provided the power
for the profitable functioning of the system. This in turn has caused wars,
crises, hunger, unemployment, environmental disasters and population
explosion. The innocuous aphorism “knowledge is power” proudly
claims this reality.? Therefore, if capitalist modernity signals discontinuity
in all its parameters, then the biggest blame can be laid on the “scientific
method” that it rests upon.

It thus becomes very important that critique of the system is directed
against this method and the “scientific disciplines” based on it. The

3r
B
Manifesto for a Democratic Civilization

fundamental weakness of all system critique, including socialist critique,
is that it uses the very method that the capitalist system rests upon. Any
society built on this method will encounter the same consequences.
Hence, despite their criticism, all opponents to the system—including
scientific socialism—have suffered the same consequences as the
capitalist society.

My analysis of the characteristics of class and society is based on
the subject-object dichotomy, because these two seemingly innocent
concepts are the ontological reasons for the unsustainability of modernity.
This notion of nature and subject is as obsessive as the dogmatic method
of the Middle Ages. Despite popular belief, scientific progress cannot be
reduced to these two concepts. On the contrary, such a clear-cut subject-
object distinction leads to a more material and primitive understanding
of life than that of the Middle Ages. While the dogmatic method deprived
human life of freedom, capitalist modernity has torn it apart on the basis
of this distinction. A deep division in all fields of life is being constructed.
Science has torn apart the whole—right down to its smallest unit. Hence,
the integrity of social life and its indivisibility with time and location were
lost to us. There is nothing worse than a life detached from its essence.

This critique does not entail that I propose a new method, nor does
it entail that I propose a total lack of methodology. What I am saying
is that we should take note of what is signified by this method, and by
the laws it claims all life—including human life—and inanimate matter
are bound by. Should we persist with the notions and method of the
scientific approach, we may deprive ourselves and nature of development
and freedom. I do not envisage the existence of universes without
method and law. At the same time, I do not believe that the universe
rests on the mathematical order of the Cartesian mechanism. I detect
striking similarities in attitude between adherents of this theory and the
Sumerian priests, and in my opinion they represent the same civilization.

But more important than denouncing a particular method or searching
for an alternative is investigating the possible interpretations of the
concept of free life. If the aim of employing a specific method is to arrive
at a meaningful life, then the method should indeed facilitate this. But
the enormous industry and state that emerged with the scientific method

38

 
On Method and the Regime of Truth

have brought war and destruction on humanity, not happiness. The big
accumulators have always initiated intolerance toward life. Society, on the
other hand, has always regarded accumulation with suspicion.

Successfully addressing the question of method requires a proper
investigation into the relevant era and civilization. Without a radical
critique of the methodology and scientific disciplines that have shaped
capitalism, all efforts to reconstruct a science that will foster a meaningful,
free life are in vain. I do not wish to contribute to the discussion on
modernity and post-modernity. I have much respect for many of the
opinions expressed on this topic but I am in agreement with the widely
held belief that we are still far from the essence of the problem.

[ wish to present my own interpretation under the notion regime of
truth. It is not an endeavor for an alternative method but rather an endeavor
to find a solution to the problems that a life detached from the values of
freedom creates. Undoubtedly, there has always been a quest for truth by
humanity; throughout the ages, various options—from mythology to
religion, from philosophy to contemporary science—have been hailed as
holding the answer. But, although we cannot perceive of a life outside of
these fields, we also cannot deny that many of our problems stem from them.

However, contemporary modernity is unique in that it has reached
an unsustainable level: the proliferation of nuclear weapons, population
explosion, exhaustion of resources, environmental destruction, excessive
growth of social rifts, disintegration of moral bonds and a stressful life that
has lost its charm and lyricism are but a few examples that demonstrate
that our regimes of truth have failed.

To prevent us from falling into a state of silent desperation, we need
to remedy the situation. To find a solution, we have to question when and
where we have made the enormous mistakes that led to these aberrations.
Mighty struggles have been waged against capitalist modernity to no
avail—we all know what happened to the systems that claimed they were
alternatives. Does this mean that the world we live in is the final and eternal
one, precisely as the system proclaims? Is another world not possible?
Attempting to answer these questions is my duty to the values of freedom.

['am convinced that capitalist modernity acquires most of its power
from erroneous social construction. Our reasoning has been weakened

.

L_A-—————A
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 

Manifesto for a Democratic Civilization

and distorted by the juxtaposing of the dualistic pairs subject-object,
idealist-materialist, dialectical-metaphysical, philosophical-scientific and
mythological-religious. The intense polarization of these dichotomies
constitutes the fundamental methodological error that has led to capitalist
modernity.

Though this reasoning has reached its peak in capitalism, rulers and
exploiters through the ages have encouraged beliefs and arguments based
on these dichotomies because of the fundamental role they have played
in legitimizing the continuation of ruling systems. If the human mind
were not conditioned to these distinctions, exploitative systems would
not have been so successful. The continuation of the intellectual wars they
cause leads to the desire for more power and more exploitation. Those in
pursuit of the truth will receive acclaim from rulers and exploiters only
for success in developing these dichotomies: “Truth is power, power is
truth.” Such a regime of truth is the strongest possible ally of the political
and exploitative regime. The consequence of such an alliance is more
oppression and exploitation, which in turn means the loss of a free and
meaningful life.

Such a regime of truth should not be tolerated any longer. We need
to reject the system’s regime of truth on all fronts. In other words, I am
not talking about merely opposing the system but about developing an
alternative system based on the analysis of the flawed system. By resisting
not only the power networks but also the exploitation centers and by
developing the ability to build communities, the system can be attacked
at its most vulnerable spot. Every social construction is the product of a
specific mentality. All important events, all periods of development and
their resulting structures have been the work of influential minds and
their will. Thus, indeed, the world we live in does not have to be the final
and eternal one; another world is possible.

One of the biggest errors of the Marxian method was that the
proletariat, who were already under daily oppression and exploitation,
were expected to bring about the new societal construction without
the necessary mental revolution having been initiated, Marxists failed
to see that the proletariat consisted of n-oonqm lltvm the Marxists /
themselves fell for the “free worker” fallacy,

10

   
 
On Method and the Regime of Truth

Thus, what is the world-view that needs to be acquired? In order to
answer this question clearly we need to have a clear understanding of the
present mentality, originating from the subject-object dichotomy.

Firstly, despite claims to this regard, objectivity is not purely an
expression of the laws of nature and society. Profound research will show
that the so-called “objective laws” are nothing but the modern equivalent
of the “Word of God” of antiquity. The voice of the powers that transcend
nature and society have always echoed in this objectivity. If we dig deeper,
we will find the source of this voice to be the domination of tyrant and
exploiter. The objective mind and the orders given by the voice are closely
connected to the systems of civilization. It has been disciplined by and
made familiar to these systems. Even if new information is extracted
from an object, it is immediately adjusted to conform to the system. If
resistance is shown, the culprits are punished by the gods of the system,
just like Adam and Abraham, Mani and Mansur Al-Hallaj, Saint Paul and
Giordano Bruno. If, on the other hand, objectivity is that which we perceive
intuitively, objectivity is very valuable—it may even lead to true wisdom
when aligned with the values of free life. But in order to achieve this type of
objectivity, one has to be as brave as Mansur Al-Hallaj or Giordano Bruno.

We need to be aware that we can reach two sets of conclusions
through “objectivity” and that it requires great effort and resistance to
understand which represents the established, dominant system and
which represents the truth. If objective thought cannot be freed from
analytical intelligence, if it cannot be coupled with the momentary,
intuitive thought originating from emotional intelligence, then it will
play a terrible role in history. The ancient Leviathan has been replaced
by the monster that bore the atomic bomb—a monster equipped with
the analytic thinking structures of capitalist modernity. Later, when we
examine the mask-less new god—the nation-state—the capabilities of
objective analytic thought will become clear.

Subjectivism, which positions itself on the opposite side of objectivity,
claims that truth is to be attained through insight and contemplation
rather than through scrupulous study of the subject matter alone.
Subjectivism is another version of Platonism and is in danger of repeating
the erroneous and obsessive aspects of the latter, expressed in the

4

L—-—-‘-———-————.’-—h
Manifesto for a Democratic Civilization

dictum: “Truth is only that which can be felt and sensed.” This attitude
may even lead to existentialism, which considers a human being to be
whatever he makes of himself. When it comes to its perception of nature

_— e A

and society, subjectivism is a strong advocate of individualism and has
played a significant role in turning modernity’s individual into an egoist.
Instead of fostering a healthy “I” it brings forth a selfish individual,
firmly enchained to the consumptive society. And, as does its opposite,
subjectivism does not hesitate to take its place within the system. In fact,
the capitalist system owes much to this way of thinking. This attitude has

A e s i . ot A

been reflected primarily in the arts, particularly in literature and through
the use of the art industry, which has formed a whole new virtual world; it
keeps the whole of society under its influence. In this way, it provides the
system its much needed legitimacy. Society is continuously bombarded
with the sentiments of a virtual world and thus faces losing the possibility
of self-reflectivity. The truth is reduced to a world of simulation. It is no
longer meaningful to distinguish between the original and the copy. The
only positive aspect of subjectivism (as an insight) is its close link with
emotional intelligence, due to the fact that feeling and intuition play a
major role in subjectivism.

In Sufism and Middle Eastern wisdom an attempt was made to capture
the unity of nature and society through the method of contemplation.
Much progress was indeed made and it could still be utilized, as it is a
substantial source. Eastern subjectivity is superior to Western objectivity
when it comes to its moral approach to nature and society. But subjectivity,
just as objectivity, has often fallen into the trap of presenting itself as the
god’s voice. In this respect the two attitudes converge. This very aspect of
their inner and transcendental gods, together with their conceptions of
nature and society, cannot but end up serving the system’s disguised or
naked kings, who are the masked or mask-less gods.

Objectivity with all its academic institutions on the one hand, and
subjectivism with its various spiritual and religious institutions on the
other hand, breed a two-way legitimacy for capitalist modernity. Instead
of playing their roles as regimes or methods of truth, they become the
system’s sycophants. The cadres and institutions that legitimize power
and exploitation play a role as vital as that of the Institutions of brute force

W

 
Manifesto for a Democratic Civilization

structures. To obtain this, we need to realize the scientific importance of
the chosen path and we need the strength of will to obtain freedom. We
have arrived at a time where the love for truth is the only guarantee of
free life. Our slogan then becomes “Truth is love; love is free life!” Thus,
if we are not filled with love for a free life—which is both the method
to obtain truth and the regime of truth—then we can neither attain the
necessary knowledge nor build our desired social world.

Let us now examine the leading structures and knowledge in the light of
this hypothesis. We start off by rejecting the progenitors of the Bacons and
Descartes—taking the human being as our basis may be more appropriate
than the subject-object, spirit-body dichotomy. I am not pleading for a
human-centric world-view, nor for a humanistic approach. I am referring I
to the totality of facts that comprises the human being, facts such as:

1. Atoms, the building blocks of matter, have their richest existence and
composition—both in terms of number and arrangement—in the

R i

human being,
2. The human being has the advantage of representing all the plant and
animal structures of the biological world.
3. The human being has realized the most advanced forms of social life.
4. The human being has access to a very elastic and free intellectual world.
5. The human being is capable of metaphysical thought.

Clearly, the human being constitutes a unique source of knowledge,
where all these characteristics are intertwined, occurring simultaneously
and functioning as a unit. The understanding of this source in its entirety,
in its wholeness, is equal to understanding the known material universe
(or, at the very least, it is a correct first step in that direction). I will now
discuss the five points set out above in more detail.

1. Atoms, the building blocks of matter, have their richest existence
and composition—both in terms of number and arrangement—in the

human being. |

The relationship between the inter- and intra-atomic entities and life
forms can best be detected in the human belng. In a way, the human

"

B

 
.

On Method and the Regime of Truth

being can be perceived as a living alignment of matter. This does not
mean that the human being is nothing more than the sum of its matter.
Nor does it mean that matter is a structure without living emotions. It is
quite difficult to lend meaning to the relationship between matter, which
has a living emotion of its own, and the human being, which transcends
being the simple sum of its matter. I think the source of metaphysical
thought lies in this perception. If we can attain an unlimited flexibility
in our perception, we may overcome the dichotomy between matter and
meaning. It just may be that the aim of all animate and inanimate forms
is to overcome this dichotomy. Thus, the aim of matter is to have meaning
and the aim of meaning is to surpass matter. It may be possible to find
the faintest breath of love in this dichotomy. Could it be that the action-
reaction principle has evolved from the matter-meaning dichotomy? Can
this dual antagonism be the origin of the saying “the basis of the universe
is love”? This love seems to have situated itself on a strong basis within
the human being.

[ believe the search for matter within the human being is a method
that may bring us closer to the truth. It seems impossible to do so in the
isolated laboratories of modernity. In quantum physics, the relationship
between the observer and the observed does not allow for measurement.
Just as the observer changes, matter—the observed—can escape the
aftention of the observer under laboratory conditions. Therefore, the
human being can best perceive itself through introspection. Democritus
was able to discover the atom through this method several millennia
ago." Besides, the human being is a more comprehensive laboratory. I am
not saying that laboratories are of no use, but that fundamental principles
can be determined through human introspection.

We can observe all the laws of chemistry and physics within the
human being and attain a better knowledge thereof. We can come to
understand the transformation of matter to energy and the rich chemical
compounds in the structure of the human being. It is also possible to
come to understand the relationship between energy and matter as well
as the unity between matter, energy and thought in the human brain.
This leads us to the all-important question: Can the unity realized in the
human being be a characteristic of the universe as well?

45

 
 

Manifesto for a Democratic Civilization

Therefore, our first principle is the potentially rich perception of the
human being. It can be held as the main path to knowledge and a sound
principle of regime in relation to what the truth is.

2. The human being has the advantage of representing all the plant and
animal structures of the biological world.

The human being offers a rich example for observation of the aliveness-
lifelessness dichotomy. Aliveness has reached its developmental peak
and displays its most advanced characteristics in the human being.
Lifeless matter has attained its most advanced level in parallel and in
combination with aliveness. The arrangement of matter in the brain and
the development of life still holds many mysteries. The link between the
matter of the brain and the animate being that has acquired the ability to
think abstractly still has to be discovered.

In searching for a hypothesis to explain the relationship between
aliveness and lifelessness in the human being, an important assumption
should be that matter has the potential to become alive. Without this
potential, the collection of matter within the human being would not
be able to sustain this advanced form of aliveness, this life form with
emotions and thought.

Given this assumption, how can we arrive at an understanding of the
potential aliveness of matter through stronger perception?

Firstly, we should make the fundamental principle of action-reaction
the cornerstone of our notion of potential aliveness. It may be meaningful
to interpret this principle (for every action there is a reaction), which can
be observed throughout the entire universe, as potential aliveness.

In the second place, the existence-vacuum dichotomy should be part of
our notion of potential aliveness. We cannot conceive of an existence without
a vacuum and a vacuum without existence. If we strain the boundaries of our
thought, surpassing the dual antagonism of existence and vacuum, it would
mean their disappearance. But what can we call this new entity without the
existence-vacuum duality? This is the second important question. Some
immediately may give the customary reply of “God” but, if we apply our
minds, we may arrive at a more meaningful answer. We may even arrive at

the meaning of life or the answer to the M“ )
n .

  

& e et e B i Sl il A S .
On Method and the Regime of Truth

In the third place, and in combination with the action-reaction
principle, the particle characteristic of light waves should be included in
our notion of potential aliveness. This characteristic is a prerequisite for
action and reaction to occur. The “black hole,” which absorbs all light,
makeés things even more mysterious. If the energy of the radiation is
absorbed, what is left? This is one of the most difficult questions to be
answered. If we define black holes as pure energy islands, what can we
then call the energy radiation? Matter is concentrated accumulation of
energy—we all know Einstein’s famous equation. Could the universe be
composed just of the dual antagonism of a humongous black hole and
matter? Is matter non-matter that makes itself visible? Does this mean
that we can see the universe, which has made itself visible, as a big, living
being? Can it be that all dual antagonisms in life are reminiscent of this
universal dual antagonism? Can love and hate, good and bad, beauty and
ugliness, right and wrong all be the reflections of this universe?

Questions can be multiplied, but what is crucial is that the
relationship between aliveness and lifelessness can no longer be
interpreted metaphysically—as was done by religious dogmatism—or be
viewed in terms of capitalist modernity’s distinction between spirit and
body or subject and object. The richness of life neither can be explained
through the dogma of an external creator nor through the spirit-matter
dichotomy. To increase our chances of understanding development in
the universe—including aliveness and lifelessness—we need to consider,
and become adept in observing, the richness of life in the human being.
Furthermore, those who are looking for justice have the duty to look for
the how and the why of life.

No entity comes into being without explanation or circumstance;
nature is more than just that. (If we are unable to see the explanation, we
should hold civilized society responsible for losing our ability to observe.)
Thus, the development of the human being too was a meaningful one and
ours is the duty to uncover this meaning.

This perspective enables us to analyze the great diversity and
evolutionary processes in the biological world. Understanding the
transition between animate and inanimate molecules enables us to
understand the transition between the plant and the animal kingdom.

47
A—

 
Manifesto for a Democratic Civilization

Significant scientific progress already has been made in this area and,
despite shortcomings and unanswered questions, we have developed a
much better understanding of the evolutionary process.

The plant kingdom is a miracle in itself—from the most primitive plant
to an extraordinary fruit tree; from grass to roses with thorns—showing the
strength of the ability to be alive. And the relationship between the beauty
of the rose and its thorny self-protection may hold a key to another mystery:
The most striking aspect of evolution, as manifested in our botanical
examples above, is the ability for the subsequent phase to contain in itself
the previous phase, protecting the previous as part of its richness. Hence,
contrary to widespread belief, evolution continues not by eliminating the
other (as according to dogmatic Darwinism) but by multiplying the self
through enrichment. What we have is development from a single species
to a multitude of species, from a primitive fungus to the endless diversity
of living beings. And all these diverse beings have a principle in common,
namely to defend themselves in some way or another.

Another aspect of biological evolution we need to heed is sexual and
asexual reproduction. Asexual reproduction is found in very primitive forms
whereas sexual reproduction is the dominant principle. Hermaphroditism,
where female and male parts are found within a single unit, is due to the
transition between the different stages. In order to multiply and diversify
into different species the sexes need to be represented in different units.
Thus, we can attribute the female-male duality to the general development
principle of the universe, namely progress based on conflict and mutation
(in other words, positive dialectic!) We ought to learn this lesson from
nature: ijsistence to remain “the same” is denial of progress. It is also clear
that all the different kinds of quests for absolute truth did not result in the
ability to interpret the universe.

We should also pay attention to the question of why the universe wants to
flourish. Is this not proof of the universe’ aliveness? Could something'devoid
of life flourish? The plant kingdom makes it easier to answer this question.

Another important question with regard to biological development is
whether planet Earth is unique. The belief that another planet with life
forms cannot exist—because such a planet has never been encountered in
the observed universe—is a delusion of metaphysics that claims that the

A8
g‘
Manifesto for a Democratic Civilization

All the characteristics of aliveness encountered in the plant and animal
kingdoms can be seen in the human being. In terms of the ability to learn
and think, the development of the brain is at its peak. The incredible
power latent in the human being’s ability to think may even make a new
evolutionary form unnecessary. The universe recognizes itself through
our eyes: “To be known, I created the human being.™

3. The human being has realized the most advanced forms of social life.

For a meaningful method and regime of truth it is important to consider the
human (as a species that has realized its own society) as a unique subject of
study, separate from the rest of the animal kingdom. Undoubtedly, not only
in the animal kingdom but also in the plant kingdom, we encounter many
examples of existence in groups. By nature, all species have the need to live in
close proximity to each other, or even live as a group—trees have forests and
fish their schools. However, the human society has a qualitative distinction.
The society itself maybe the Ubermensch, the over-man.'® If we put a human
child back into the forest right after its birth (and, of course, securing its life),
it cannot but live the life of a primate. If similar humans have to meet there,
a social period akin to that of the primates will develop. This indicates the
distinct value of human society, the role society plays in forming the human
being and the role of the human being in constructing society.

Of course, without humans there would be no human society. But
to view society as nothing but the sum of humans is a fallacy. A human
without society cannot surpass being a primate. With society, the
human becomes an incredible power. All things realized within the
human individual must be socially developed. It is impossible to attain
knowledge and establish the regime of truth in the absence of society. The
human being is not only the inheritor of the plant and animal kingdom,
the physical and chemical universe; it is a being that has been realized in
society. All civilized systems, including capitalist modernity, have studi&d
the human being detached from history and society. In fact, all thoughts
and structures discussed and established by human beings have been
represented as the work of individuals superior to society, detached from
history and society. This has made it easy to invent the disguised and
naked kings and the masked and unmasked gods. Hence, with a better

_
On Method and the Regime of Truth

understanding of society, we will not only be able to analyze the roles
these kings and gods have played but we will also be able to pinpoint
which tyrannous and exploitative social systems they originated from.

A serious problem regarding any method is to establish in a
meaningful way the relationship between human being and society. It
seems that both the Bacons and Descartes were unaware of their own
societies as they discussed questions of methodology. Today we know
very well that the societies they were part of and were affected by were
the societies of what we today call England and the Netherlands, societies
that built capitalism as a world system.!" As a result, the methods these
three scientists constructed were imbedded in those societies and
brought forth ideas that left the door to capitalism wide open.

What could be our main observations if we were to consider human
society as a fundamental category?

a. The society itself is a formation that qualitatively differentiates humans
from animals, as has been indicated above.

b. Although the society is built by human beings, it in turn builds human
individuals. The main issue that needs to be understood here is the fact
that society or communities are constructed by the human mind and
competency. They have profoundly affected the human memory and,
although they have been projected to be everything from a totem to a
god, it is clear that they are mere human constructs. If the human being
ceased to exist there would be no society for the totems or gods to rule.

¢. Societies are under historical and geographical restrictions (i.e., every
society conforms to the dictates of the time when and the geographical
circumstances under which it is constructed). History, for all living
beings, but especially for humans, denotes dependency on time. The
connection between history and society is tightly knit and is of a short
time span.” We can talk about millions of years in connection with the
universe, but for societies going beyond a few thousand years it is only
possible in the context of the notion of long time span.'* Geographical
location of societies is determined by distribution of plant and animal
life. The rich flora and fauna in some regions constitute the basis for
numerous socleties; societies at the poles and in arid areas are rare.

51
M
e

Manlifesto for a Democratic Civilization

Many of the schools of thought and religious structures formed
within societal and state traditions impose a system detached from
history and geography on the human consciousness, as if this system is
their fate. We are told that capitalist modernity bases itself on science.
Why, then, does this system take great care to think of the individual
as isolated from society? The time span and geographical location
of a society constructs the individual and in turn, the individuals
construct the future. Therefore, historical and geographical location are
the two foremost prerequisites in order to deal with any problems of
methodology and perception of regime of truth.

d. Social realities are constructs. People mistakenly believe social
institutions and structures to be natural realities because the regimes
striving to construct legitimacy for these social systems present them
as unchangeable and sacred. They preach that these systems are divine
establishments, so designated by the god. Capitalist modernity claims
that the ultimate word has been uttered, that there are no alternatives
to liberal institutions. There is much talk about unchangeable and
unalterable constitutions and political regimes. However, a quick look at
history shows that these “permanent, unshakable” structures have only
been around for the last century. Hence, the rulers and exploiters need
ideological and political rhetoric to constantly enchain the thoughts and
will of human beings. To administer today’s society in the absence of a
strong ideological and political rhetoric is truly difficult. This is why the
media is so well developed. And this is why, in general, scientific and
intellectual schools have been tied down by the rulers and exploiters.

The realization that social realities dre constructed realities will bring
the awareness that they can be demolished and re-constructed. There is
no social reality that cannot be demolished or changed, including all its
ideological and material institutions. Under the appropriate time and
geographical circumstances social realities in all social fields (such as
language, religion, mythology, science, economy, politics, law, morality
and philosophy) are continuously established, demolished and restored
and new ones are formed as needed.

e. Itis important not to view the relationship between society and the
individual as a theoretical one. Individuals are born into established

; ”

 

 
On Method and the Regime of Truth

structures that have been shaped within the depths of history and within

a distinct language and established traditions. They cannot participate

as they wish—they participate on the basis of the society’s carefully

and previously prepared institutions and traditions. An extraordinary
educational effort is needed for the socialization of the individual. In

fact, in a way the individual becomes a member of the society only after
the culture of the society has been absorbed. Socialization can only be
achieved through continuous effort. Each social act is at the same time an
act of socialization. Therefore, individuals cannot escape being constructed
according to the dictates of its society. But because classed and hierarchic
societies are prone to being oppressive and exploitative societies, the
individual will always demand freedom and hence resist. The individual
will not readily accept societies that construct slavery. Yet, there will be
endeavors not only to transform these individuals as they pass through the
oppressive and educational social institutions but also to eliminate them.
However, the resisting individual will always find space for itself because
of the contradictions between institutions and the equilibrium based on
compromises within the society. Although the society does not have the
strength to totally dissolve the individual, the individual too does not have
the ability to detach itself completely from society.

In short, methodological work and regimes of truth based on a human
sample that perceives society for what it is may end up with more
meaningful results.

4. The human being has access to a highly elastic and free intellectual world.

Ihe flexibility of the human mind enhances the possibility of a meaningful
Investigation. In the absence of a sound knowledge of the human mind,
any ideas about method and truth will be worthless.

We have referred to the dual structure of the human mind before:
the right lobe of the brain (the seat of emotional intelligence) is more
advanced and older in terms of evolution than the newer part (in the left
lobe of the brain), where analytical intelligence is based.

In the animal kingdom, the developmental level of emotions and
thought is nearly on an equal level—emotions are triggered by things

53

I i
Manifesto for a Democratic Civilization

learned through conditioned and unconditioned reflexes, they are
momentary reactions. The same structures exist in the human being—
for example, our bodies respond to fire immediately and there is no need
to think analytically. But to climb Mount Everest there are hundreds
of things that need to be considered before departure. Analytical
intelligence may take years to mature. With emotional intelligence, there
is no margin for error and action is based on intuition.

The primary characteristic of our mind is its flexible structure. There
are very few entities in the universe that possess the ability of free choice.
We may think of the areas of freedom as narrow intervals. We do not know
how free choice occurs within subatomic particles and the structures in the
macro universe. However, we can deduce from the observable outcomes
and the diversity within the universe that flexibility in behavior and ability
have to exist in the worlds of particles and in the macro universe in order
to make a free choice. But in the human brain, this interval of flexibility
has widened quite substantially. At least potentially we have unlimited
freedom of movement—but let us not forget that this potentiality can only
become active when coupled with sociality.

Another characteristic of our mind is that its structure allows not only

correct but also false perceptions. The combination of this characteristic
and its flexibility allows it to be led astray under physical and emotional
oppression. That is why mechanisms of oppression and torture are used in
conjunction with deceptive and erroneous promises. The extraordinary
effect of the coercion of the human mind by the hierarchic and statist
orders has been the construction of a mind favorable to themselves.
However, the structure of our mind also allows us to resist, to attain the
truth, to choose the right path. An independent mind has been decisive
in the rise of those personalities that have contributed to humanity. Free
choice can best be realized when minds work independently. There is a
close tie between rich conceptualization and independent thought. 1

By “independence of mind” I mean the ability to act in accordance
with the principles of justice. As discussed before, there is a universal order
that determines the relationship between reality and justice. Thus, if the
mind has the ability to be just, we can say that it has used the opportunity

decreed by the universal order to make the best use of its ability to freely

54

e M W ———

 
 

On Method and the Regime of Truth

make a choice. Therefore, the history of freedom (that is, social history),
which is the best educative power, prepares the mind for the right choices.

Psychoanalytic approaches try to measure the depth of our mind and
It gains importance as a new field of information. But psychoanalysis
on its own lacks the ability to arrive at the correct and necessary
Information. This is due mostly to its perception of the human being
s an independent entity. Detaching the human being from its society
may lead to an insufficient and unsound collection of knowledge. At
present, the attempts of psycho-sociology to remove the insufficiencies
look unpromising. If sociology has not been constructed properly, how
van psycho-sociology bear the right results? Psychology may provide
knowledge about the animal mind and can even provide knowledge
ol the human being as a super animal. But we are only at the start of
knowing the human being as a social animal.

It should be clear now that without knowledge of the structure of
the mind, successful results in constructing a method and a system of
knowledge can be nothing but a mere coincidence. If we achieve a true
~ and insightful definition of the mind and if we secure the human position
to make free choices (that is, if we secure social freedom), our method
and regime of knowledge may deliver a competent response to correct
perceptions. Under such conditions, methodical study and a less flawed
tullection of knowledge increase our chances of being free individuals in

W [ree society.

   
 
 
 
   
  
  
  
   
 
 
   
 

A, The human being is capable of metaphysical thought.

‘he metaphysical character of the human being is a unique phenomenon
M terms of methodology and system of knowledge. The method and
nee of arriving at information (epistemology) can be improved by
alyzing these characteristics of the human being. In metaphysics, an
Amportant area of study is the comprehension of the human being itself.
least analyzed social aspect is the definition of the metaphysical
an. We still need answers to questions such as:

"

+  How is it possible that the human being is metaphysical?

+  What need does this arise from? |
On Method and the Regime of Truth

lust, passion, beauty, etc. metaphysical thought and institutions are
indispensable. This need can only be satisfied by the creation of a god,
creation of art and development of knowledge.

If we look at it from a different perspective and think of metaphysics
as that “beyond the physical,” the need to either condemn or praise it,
disappears. Through metaphysics, the boundaries of the physical world
are being pressed back by the human being. Man lives meta-physically
because of its ontological character. It is meaningless to claim that there
s nothing besides a physical life. Besides, such a condition would only
lead to the definition of a mechanical human being.

Secondly, the fact that in the absence of morals society cannot
be upheld, necessitates our being metaphysical. Society can only be
engineered through morals, which is free judgment. The disintegration
of the Soviet Union’s Russia and the Pharaohs’ Egypt, despite all its
fationalism, can be linked to lack of morality. Rationality alone is not
sufficient to uphold society. It may robot-ize and turn its members into
fully developed animals, but it cannot retain them as human beings.
Some of the qualities of morality are:

+ endurance of pain and the strength to counter it;

+ the ability to restrict pleasure, desire and lust; to set social—not
'physical—rules for reproduction;

+ the ability to decide whether to abide by traditions, religion and laws.

F'or example, sexual intercourse needs to be bound by rules because of its
teproductive feature. We need to take care when it comes to population
growth so that the society can be maintained. Hence, this topic alone
shows us that there is a great need for moral metaphysics.

Thirdly, humans create a universe of their own through arts. Society
~ Is sustained through creations in fundamental areas such as music,
- Visual arts and architecture. It is impossible to think of a society without

music, literature or architecture. All creations in these areas are of a
metaphysical character. For the sustenance of society, these creations are
Indispensable. Art, as a metaphysical construction, satisfies the human
need for aesthetics. Just as the human being gives meaning to its moral

57

 
Manifesto for a Democratic Civilization

behavior through its choice between good and evil, it also gives meaning
to artistic behavior through its judgment on beauty and ugliness.

Fourthly, the field of political rule abounds with metaphysical
judgment. This field is the strongest metaphysical construction of all—we
cannot define politics through physical rules. Governance solely through
physical rules is at best robot-like and at worst the “flock herding” of
fascism. If we add that the political field also has the connotation of
choice and freedom of behavior, then we would once again arrive at the
metaphysical character of the political person. Aristotle’s statement that
“Man is a political animal” is more reminiscent of such a meaning."

Fifthly, we should emphasize that law, philosophy and even “scientism”
are loaded with metaphysics.’® All these areas are qualitatively and
quantitatively full of metaphysical works of art. Keeping in mind the
important status of metaphysics in the life of the individual and society,
we can continue to develop a more meaningful approach:

1. Metaphysical approaches have either been hailed as the fundamental
truth or have been regarded as fictitious, as words and tools to deceive
man. These approaches are either completely unaware of the history
of society or they are exaggerating. What both of these approaches are
unaware of is the social and individual need that gives rise to metaphysics.

Those that hail the metaphysical have denied its relationship with
the physical world and perceive it as boundlessly free. In denying
the relationship between thought and spirit, or in confusing the
metaphysical with the physical world, they have fallen into obsessions
or exaggerations of transcendental divine orders—even exalted humans
as god. The hierarchic and statist order has had an important effect on
these developments.

Those who deny the importance of metaphysics (for instance the
rationalists and the positivists) have attacked it intensely and have
hailed the materialist world and civilization: anything reminiscent of

metaphysics is a tool of deception and should be rejected completely.
In retrospect, we understand that rationalism and positivism paved the
way for the “fascist flock,” the “robotic and mechanical human being
and the “simulative” perceptions of life, destroylng the environment

 
 

On Method and the Regime of Truth

and the history of society. Extreme adherence to the laws of physics
cannot prevent the destruction or the dissolution of society; “scientism”
has thereby proven that it is the worst metaphysics of all. I do have to
emphasize that “scientism” is the shallowest materialism and the most
knowledgeable expert of power and exploitation. Whether knowingly or
not, it is the biggest deceiver and the representative of the worst form of
metaphysics.

Those who say that they do not belong to any of the sides, whom
we may call nihilists, claim that there is no need to be pro- or anti-
metaphysics and that one could live in total independence. Although
they may seem the most harmless of the groupings, in essence they

. are the most dangerous—at least the other two have great ideals and

are aware of what they represent; they strive to reform society and

to re-construct the individual. The nihilists, who believe that total

independence is possible, pay no attention to these discussions. Their

number has been increased enormously by capitalist modernity, in
which they constitute the déclassé elements of the dissolved society.

While presently football hooligans are the most outstanding example of

this grouping, the number of similar movements is on the rise.

2. The difference between two opposing approaches to metaphysics, the pro-
and anti-schools, in actuality falls away in modernity. While the religion
of the anti-school is positivism—which is disguised metaphysics—the
god of both groups is the nation-state. The god that has removed its mask
is being sanctified in the form of the nation-state in all modern societies.

1. Ibelieve there is a need for and the possibility of developing a more
balanced approach. I do realize that metaphysics is a societal construct,
hence I feel obliged to develop a metaphysics in morals, art, politics and

thinking that will be closer to the ideal of good, beautiful, free and true.
The essence of a virtuous life is the continuance of the quest for the good,
beautiful, free and true, as it was in historical societies. I believe that a
meaningful life within society is only possible when lived according to
this art of a virtuous life.

We are not, of course, obliged to metaphysics but we cannot just give
up our quest for finding and developing the “best, most beautiful, freest

59

 
Manifesto for a Democratic Civilization

and truest.” Just as we are not obliged to the ugly, evil, unfree and untrue,
it is not impossible either to live a good, beautiful, free and true life.
Neither are we obliged to go through life as nihilists. This argument
has continued since the beginning of time, since the era of early social
construction. What is unique about this issue today is that we are at the
dissolution phase of capitalist modernity, exactly the period where a
struggle for the good, beautiful, free and true is needed for the new social
re-constructions. And, we do not only need a love-like passion but also
the most scientific pursuit—that is a method and regime of truth.

The arguments that I have set out above for overcoming capitalist
modernity and developing and spreading democratic modernity need to
be developed further. In order to achieve this, we need to criticize the
method and regimes of knowledge that have led to the official institutions
of modernity and to clarify post-modernity’s groundbreaking method
and systems of knowledge. This is my intent with this material.

I explained how and why we should focus on the human being. The
correct definition and perception of both the individual and of society remain
important. The efforts of sociology, psycho-sociology and anthropology are
not productive because they are distorted by modernity and jammed in its
knowledge and power networks. Precious individual efforts, on the other
hand, are unsystematic and disorganized. Although important contributions
have been made, especially by Nietzsche, the Frankfurt School, Fernand
Braudel, and later Foucault and Wallerstein, the new method and regimes
of knowledge (the dissolution of modernity and the new post-modernity,
which we would like to name “democratic modernity”), are far from
being systematized. There are numerous and precious efforts but they are
fragmented. The fundamental reason for this is the poisoning by the capitalist
system, as Wallerstein has already demonstrated. They all suffer under the
clamps of the modernity. Let us look at a few examples:

Nietzsche talks about how society is made to adopt wife-like features
and is enslaved by modernity. When he uses the phrase “blond Germanic
beast,” which defines fascist flocking, it is as if he could see fifty years
into the future.'” It is clear that he thinks modernization and becoming
a nation-state sooner or later leads to fascist flocking, He can almost be
called the prophet of the capitalist era.

00 ||-|

 
 

On Method and the Regime of Truth

Max Weber had also embarked on an important finding when he
described modernity as “the trapping of the society in an iron cage” He
underlined the material characteristic of the civilization when he described
rationality as the reason behind the disenchantment of the world.

Fernand Braudel directed harsh criticism against the social sciences
that are detached from a historical and geographical dimension. He
called them a “trivial pile of events.” This is an immense contribution to
the question of methodology. New horizons in writing history have been
opened up by his notions of la longue durée or geographic structures,
conjuncture or medium term socio-economic cycles, and événements or
short term or episodic events.'®

The Frankfurt School’s criticism of the Enlightenment and modernity
Is ground breaking. Adorno’s analysis of modern civilization as the “end
of an era in darkness” is a competent evaluation. With the phrase “the
wrong life cannot be lived rightly,” he acknowledged that modernity has
been founded on the wrong method and knowledge." His criticism of
the Enlightenment and rationality also opens up new horizons.

To Nietzsche's declaration that God is dead, Foucault added that “the
end of man is at hand® He ascribed modern power to constant wars,
Inside and outside the society. His notional chain of power, knowledge,
prison, hospital, mental institution, school, military institution, factory
and brothel has not only made methodological contributions but also
has made indirect contributions to how a system of free knowledge can
be established. Due to his premature death, he was not able to complete
his analysis of power, war and freedom. He seems to conclude that it
Is modernity that kills man. From that, we can deduce that freedom is
communal life that has managed to exclude war. Therefore, we have to
abolish industrialism and militarism, which produce all the destructive
tools and aim for profit and regular armies. Yet, freedom cannot be
realized if we cannot replace industrialism and militarism with self-
defense and an ecologically sound society.

Immanuel Wallerstein is confident with his perception of the capitalist
world system. He paints an excellent picture of the modern system from
the 16th century until today. But he is not always clear in his evaluation of
the system (as with Marx, he considers the capitalist phase as a necessity

61
Manifesto for a Democratic Civilization

and tends to see it in a positive light), his opposition to it and finding
a way out of it. Wallerstein has shown great wisdom with his theses
that the socialist system—especially that of Soviet Russia—strengthens
capitalist modernity instead of overcoming it and that its dissolution will
not eventually strengthen capitalist liberalism but weaken it. He does
not show the same competence when it comes to dissolving the system
and finding new ways out of it. He states that we cannot foresee when
and how the structural crisis of capitalist modernity thatstarted in the
1970s will end, yet each small but meaningful intervention may lead to
enormous results. He has distanced himself from strict. determinism.
In conclusion, we can say that Wallerstein is one of the most powerful
evaluators of method and system of knowledge.

Undoubtedly, there are many other intellectuals that should be
mentioned. The criticism and proposals produced by Murray Bookchin
in relation to ecology and Paul Feyerabend in relation to method and
logic are groundbreaking. However, none of these intellectuals are able to
competently combine knowledge and action. (Without a doubt, capitalist
modernity’s tremendous power to tie everything to itself has had an effect.)

The Marxist school claims to be the most scathing and most scientific
critique of capitalism but ironically this has not prevented Marxism
from being the most useful tool in terms of knowledge and power
for the system. It could not escape being liberalism’s left wing—150
years of experience sufficiently proofs this. Its method and its entire
collection of knowledge can be categorized under the heading “economic
reductionism.” Scientific socialism (which has handled the metaphysical
and historical characteristics of society in a most simplistic way, reduced
the notion of power to a government committee and gave a magical role
to economic and political analyses) could not escape being yet another
version of positivism. Although much was expected from sociology and
its founders, Emile Durkheim and Max Weber, its method and theory
of knowledge (epistemology) could never amount to more than being
liberalism’s left wing. Yet again we see that what is important and decisive
is not the intention but the assimilating and integrating power of the
system (its method, knowledge-power, technical power) that dominates
society. Economy certainly is an important power that should be taken

    
 
 

On Method and the Regime of Truth

into account; however, in the absence of a proper historical and social
analysis of political power and other fundamental metaphysical forces,
any effort to transcend the system of capitalist modernity cannot but end
up being a vulgar positivism. The present theory and practice sufficiently
prove this.

The anarchist schools that emerged as the radical critique of capitalist
modernity are competent in issues such as methodology and the
theory of knowledge. Unlike the Marxists, they do not talk about the
progressiveness of capitalism. They were able to perceive society from
many different perspectives and did not limit themselves to economic
reductionism. They play their role of the system’s “rebellious children”
quite competently. However, despite all their good intentions, they could
not ultimately avoid becoming a sect that stubbornly protected itself from
the system’s sins. My critique of Marxism fits these movements as well:
In the absence of a valid definition of the system, these schools failed to
formulate the relevant questions that would have provided democratic
modernity with the competent use of method-power and knowledge-
action, thus enabling it to overcome the system.

A similar evaluation of the theory and practice of the ecological,
feminist and cultural movements can be made. They resemble the
nestling partridges that have just escaped modernity’s iron cage. We
are continuously worried about where and when they would be hunted
down. But they are important movements of hope. They will have much
to contribute when the main alternative movement has developed.

The social democrat and national liberation movements have
integrategd with the modern system above all the others and continue to
be its driving forces. They have managed to become the two strongest
denominations of the main movement, which is liberalism.

As we near the conclusion, it would be useful to state my anti-Orientalist
approach. Taking stock of my position relative to modernity, I realize that I
am at odds with it. I can immediately give two reasons for this.

Firstly, it is the effect of the classical Middle Eastern culture that
has deep-rooted differences with capitalist modernity. In the first place,
Middle Eastern culture radically differs from capitalist modernity in
the priority it assigns to society. Individualism is not easily welcomed

63

 
Manifesto for a Democratic Civilization

by society. Loyalty to the society is the fundamental criterion in the
assessment of the personality and is praised above all else. Detachment
from the society is scorned and ridiculed; changing societies is also
regarded negatively. Occupying a place within the hierarchy and state is
envied. (Religion, tradition, and the traditional state culture of the Middle
East have strongly influenced these values.) As a result, it is not easy to
submit to foreign and modern cultures. Stated differently, it is really
difficult to assimilate. Thus, it is not surprising that the strong tradition of
the Ummah culture (the Community of Believers) is still preferred to the
nation-state. This is because the nation-state is the product of capitalist
modernity: it is foreign. When political Islam and the nation-state are
compared, (both being nationalistic at heart) Islamic nationalism is
still preferred.” This comparison alone proves the historical and social
permanence of this cultural structure.

Secondly, although I never stayed committed to any of its movements
for long, I was always very interested in Western schools of thought. In
my quest for truth, I became aware of the method and accumulation of
knowledge and science that led to modernity. I see its clear-cut mastery. Asa
result, I feel the same affinity with modern culture as I have with the Middle
Eastern culture. Albeit late, I realized that they were of the same material
and I saw the real source of both cultures to be the five thousand year-old
hierarchic and statist structures. After this realization, I had no hesitation in
daring to criticize the common aspects of both of these cultures.

It is not difficult to see that individualism is eroding the society.
Neither is it too difficult to understand that capitalist liberalism is not the
freedom of the individual it proposes to be, but that it is the art of human
society’s erosion. It has its origins in the traditional merchant culture. It
can be shown that the merchant culture is linked to many of the ancient
traditions, including the three major monotheistic religions of the
Middle East. Commodification and exchange of commodities, which are
the roots of commerce, have played the leading role in the erosion and
disintegration of the communities and societies. The merchant mentality
is a deep-rooted tradition of the Middle East. It has played a decisive
role in enforcing negative elements of symbols, identities, languages
and structures on society. (The creation and sanctification of god, the

: "
 

On Method and the Regime of Truth

turning of the art of state administration into one that is conspiratorial,
and the permanent insertion of deceit and hypocrisy into morality, are
only a few examples.) The contribution of Western Europe lays in its
ability to take this system from the Middle East, combine it with the
outcomes of the Renaissance, Reformation and Enlightenment and then
to make it the dominant social system. The Middle Eastern societies do
not esteem the merchant and its institutions highly. On the contrary,
they have always aroused suspicion. The success of European capitalist
modernity, however, is to make the commodity system society’s most
precious element and to put all the sciences, religions, and arts at the
service of this new society. As a result, people that were undistinguished
and of little importance in the Middle East became the chosen and the
all-important ones for Europe.

It has become quite fashionable in today’s Middle East to criticize
European modernity and to violently oppose it through radical
Islam. However, these critics (from approaches like Edward Said’s to
organizations like Hezbollah) that seem to be anti-Orientalist and an
enemy of Western modernity are nothing but establishments within
the boundaries of this modernity—just like Marxism. As a result, they
cannot escape serving capitalist modernity dishonorably. Since they
owe their existence to modernity, it is in their nature to beg modernity
and to defend it—whether successful or not. These organizations have
only put on the clothes and the beard of tradition. Their soul and body
are loaded with the most backward remnants of modernity.

While presenting the framework of my method of criticism and my
evaluation of knowledge, I have tried to shed some light on the method
and science that has led to the formation of capitalist modernity. It
may not be absolutely correct in all aspects, but this framework does
prowide us with a chance to develop our own method and science for the
preferred option of freedom and democratic life at a time when capitalist
modernity is going through a period of structural “chaos.”

The cornerstones of this narrative (as discussed either in this section or
in my earlier books) are summarized here for clarity.

65

 
Manifesto for a Democratic Civilization

1.

There is a relation between the methods of Roger Bacon, Francis Bacon
and Descartes—the scientific paradigm—and capitalism of which we
should be critically aware.

The intensification of the distinction between subjectivity and objectivity
and its reflection in various dichotomies allows the individual (the
subject) to utilize society (the object) as a source open to all sorts of
exploitation.

This results in the distinction between the bourgeoisie and the proletariat
being perceived as natural and thus paving the way for the proletariat to
be used as an object.

The realization that “knowledge is power” lays the foundation of the
union of science and power. Hence, the union of knowledge and power
was turned by the system very early on into its fundamental weapon.
Science has been turned into a new religion in the form of positivism,
capitalizing on the exposed absurdities and obsessions of religion and
metaphysics. In the name of a struggle against religion and metaphysics,
the new religion has been formed to ensure domination.

The most powerful ideological hegemony has been realized by declaring
liberalism to be the official ideology of capitalist modernity. This is then
used on the one hand as a tool of immense compromise and on the other
hand as a weapon to assimilate and integrate all opposing ideologies.
Liberalism and positivism are officially sanctioned to discredit many
other schools of thought and ideological movements. This will continue
until all the opponents of the system are integrated.

Philosophy and morality are discredited to reduce the chances of
opponents developing their own perspectives and taking a stand against
the system.

The internal unity of science and its power of meaning is fragmented
through its division into a multitude of disciplines. This excessive
fragmentation makes science dependent on the power structure and thus
it can easily be turned into profitable technology. The aim of knowledge
is no longer the discovery of the meaning of life but making money. This
enables the transition from the unity of science and wisdom to the unity
of science, power and money. The unity of science, power and capital is

the new sacred alliance of modernity.

 
On Method and the Regime of Truth

 

10. In capitalist modernity, in addition to the completion of the
housewifization (the most advanced form of slavery) of woman, the
housewifization of man—after his castration through citizenship—has
also been achieved.? As a result, the society’s control has been attained
through housewifization.**

I1. In modernity, political power has meant continuous war both within
and between societies—a “war of all against all,” in Hobbes’ words.*
Genocide is the extremum of these wars.

12. In the system of capitalist modernity, the period of center and periphery
expansion has been completed; damage to ecology has reached
unsustainable levels, unemployment and poverty are at its worst levels,
wages are low, there is an excessive bureaucracy, religious society is
collapsing, going through the age of the global finance hegemony, which
is the most parasitic form of capitalism. However, the fact that networks
of resistance are established in all areas and amongst the majority of
society generates a structural crisis.

13. In periods of structural crisis, revolutionary and counter-revolutionary
movements, democratic-libertarian movements and totalitarian-fascist
groups all vie to shape the future. Those who develop their methodology
and scientific systems the most competently and make it the basis of
their actions have the best chance of determining the new social system.

I4. Thus, during such periods of structural crisis and chaos, the democratic,
ecological, libertarian and egalitarian movements may be able to form

the establishments needed to determine the far future through small but
effective moves.

To this end:

I, Sociology should be used as the blueprint for action—but a sociology
imbedded in the historical and geographical dimensions of society.

2. Capitalist modernity should be seen as the malignant structure that it is
and (keeping in mind point 14), a solution should be sought outside the
boundaries of this system.

3. We have to ideologically overcome all the vulgar dichotomies based on
the subject-object distinction, such as idealism-materialism, dialectics-
metaphysics, liberalism-socialism and deism-atheism. Instead, we

67

 
Manifesto for a Democratic Civilization

should apply the art of interpretation that takes all scientific gains into
consideration.

4. We should constantly and critically develop a human metaphysics based
on goodness, beauty, freedom and truth.

5. Democratic politics should be the norm.

6. Based on democratic politics, thousands of non-governmental
organizations should be established in areas where there is a crisis of power.

7 A new social nation should be constructed as the democratic nation.

It can be separate from the nation-state but one should not disregard
the possibility that these two can also exist next to each other or within
each other.

8. The political administrative model for the democratic nation should
be developed on the basis of local, national, regional and world
democratic confederalism. Different nations can be organized in
a single democratic nation. The same nation can be organized as
both a nation-state and a democratic nation. Regional democratic
confederalisms and World Democratic Nations’ Confederalism are
quite essential and can be more effective (much more than today’s UN)
in the resolution of local-national problems.

9. Democratic society should be anti-industrialist and economy and
technology should be ecologically sound.

10. The defense of the society should be ensured by people’s militia.

11. A new family system, based on deep-rooted freedom and the equality of
woman, should replace the system based on the deep-rooted slavery of
women. Such a system will help to abolish the male-based hierarchic and
statist order.

The era of capitalist modernity is also the period in which the ideal of a
utopia of freedom and equality has revived. Much blood has been spilt
for this ideal: there are numerous cases of torture and inflictions of pain.
It is unthinkable that this suffering has been in vain. On the contrary, we
have to attain a proper historical interpretation of our problems and let
that illuminate our future. Then we should be able to make the transition
into a life where love reigns. However, the transition to such a utopia
requires a serious effort.

6 .““

 

 
On Method and the Regime of Truth

I'am not so insolent as to re-initiate the quest for method and regime
of truth with myself. But what I tried to demonstrate in all the topics I
examined was that there is something terribly wrong that is fundamental
to our world perception. I emphasize that my analysis should be seen
neither as an effort to construct a new system nor as the total rejection
of that which I criticized. After all, it is important to criticize the system
of capitalist modernity that has led to millions of cases similar to my
own, to countless massacres, genocides and wars. This is especially true
of the people and region of which I am part—the Kurds and the Middle
East—who are going through the most brutally tragic period. The least
contribution I can make, as an intellectual, is to examine all of the factors
that are responsible for this terrible situation. I am being tried as the head
of a comprehensive and effective organization and my primary duty is to
look for solutions to the questions with which we are faced. If, at a given
place and time, that oppression, exploitation, dissolution and deadlock
is so profound that to live is worse than being dead, then there is no
alternative but to replace the existing world-view with a profoundly new
approach, Hereafter, I shall advance such an approach.

69

 
Section 2

The Main Sources
of Civilization

As argued in the previous section, the best way to obtain insight into
a specific society is through an examination of its historical and
geographical conditions. We will turn to this now, as I try to analyze the
main factors that have led to today’s civilization.

From our earliest primate beginnings, it seems to have taken us at
least seven million years to arrive at the agricultural revolution about
8,000 years ago. Paleontological evidence indicates that hominid species
evolved in Africa from approximately 2.5 million years ago and spread
from there to Asia and Europe. Homo Sapiens seems to have evolved in
East Africa, around 150,000 to 200,000 years ago, and soon afterwards
started spreading around the globe from the East African Rift Valley
during the so-called “first exit” out of Africa.

In Africa, and later in other parts of the world, all hominid species are
believed to havelived in clans of twenty to thirty people, sustaining themselves
by gathering and hunting. Ownership and family had not yet developed
but the clan system functioned as the extended family. It Is believed that

70

_—_—-—-A-—

 
The Main Sources of Civilization

early Homo species mastered a communication system consisting of body
and sound signs, but were not yet able to transform sounds into symbols.
Nevertheless, this communication system brought many advantages such as
the ability to act in unison when hunting or fighting.

Research indicates that approximately 150,000 to 200,000 years ago,
Homo Sapiens developed something akin to language. These studies also
indicate that around 50,000 years ago a second wave of migration from
East Africa, via the Rift Valley took place. Prior to the second exodus from
Africa, humans had already obtained a communication system consisting
of sounds with symbolic meaning—the origin of modern languages.'

We can assume that the early humans, both inside and outside of
Africa, lived in larger communities and hunted intentionally, that they
used caves as dwellings and that women specialized in gathering and
men in hunting. Some archaeological findings point to the fact that the
species advanced rapidly during this time due to their obtaining symbolic
thought. For instance, the incredible cave drawings from this period in the
region of the French-Spanish border and in Hakkari, Kurdistan, attest to
the fact that these humans possessed symbolic thought.? There may even
be a connection between the complex communication system of modern
humans and the elimination of the other hominid species (amongst others
the Neanderthals, who disappeared between 30,000 and 40,000 years ago).

The Contribution of the Taurus-Zagros Arc to Humanity

It is my contention that the Taurus-Zagros Arc—the so called Fertile
Crescent—was the main gathering and dispersion point for humans as
they exited Africa through the East African Rift. In the first place, the
Arc forms the end of the natural path of the Rift. The Great Sahara and
the Arabian Desert block off the eastern and western entrances into Asia
and Europe, leaving the Suez and the eastern Mediterranean shores as
the natural paths for human expansion. This ideal path is the arc formed
by the Taurus-Zagros Mountain range, off the eastern Mediterranean
shores. Secondly, the suitable weather conditions, the huge numbers of
shelters provided by the caves in this area, the abundance of streams and
rivers, and the fertility that led to the creation of the image of “Paradise”

n

 
Manifesto for a Democratic Civilization

in the memory of humanity—all made the Fertile Crescent the ideal
gathering point, a “place of incubation” for civilizational development.
With their newly acquired ability of symbolic language, the extensive
area of the Fertile Crescent provided its inhabitants a unique opportunity
for societal development with its safe shelter and a ready food source.” For
the first time, humans made the transition from a nomadic life style to
a culture of a settled life. The four seasons could be now be experienced
together in all of their beauty. The new circumstances brought about
a new life style—that is, a new cultural era, the Mesolithic. New terms
were coined to name the new society, along with other concepts, new
objects, new plants and animals, and all of them became part of the newly
developing languages of the widespread communities of the Arc. Hence,
new communities with new identities were formed in the Fertile Crescent.
In comparison to the Palaeolithic era that lasted a few million years,
the Mesolithic period in the Arc was short-lived. Despite its short span,
the Mesolithic period had a profound effect on this region, as attested to
by the Hakkari caves and hewn stones. But the real progress was made
in the Neolithic—an era we can call the Era of the Farming, Field and
Village Revolution. It is a cultural era of which the importance has not
yet been fully understood and which has not yet received the attention
it deserves.* The Neolithic inhabitants of the Fertile Crescent brought
numerous inventions and revolutionary developments in areas such
as agriculture, arts and crafts, transport, housing, administration and
religion; inventions and developments that truly shaped the modern era.
It is here in the Arc that the shepherd culture was likely introduced
by the Semites during a period of favorable weather conditions at the
end of the fourth ice age around 10,000 years ago. The impact of this
new life style is clear from the cultural importance that the accumulation
of sheep, camels and goats still have in the Semitic culture today—in its
essence the Semitic culture still is a shepherd culture. Furthermore, from
the Sumerian and Egyptian tablets of the time, it is clear that they too
valued the importance of the shepherd culture. It seems that the Semitic
culture has left a permanent mark on a vast area from the Sahara and
Eastern Arabia to the lands suitable for agriculture in the North,
However, the Arians of the Arc were the pioneers of crop farming, (The

 

n

_—-—A——
Manifesto for a Democratic Civilization

I received some criticism on my analysis of the source of modern
civilization as set out in Prison Writings: The Roots of Civilization (the
published form of the argument for my submission before the Court of
Human Rights of the Council of Europe). I have been criticized for being
excessively reductionist in postulating the Euphrates and Tigris basin, and
hence the Sumerian civilization, as the foundation of modernity. After
thorough consideration of this criticism, I still maintain that this postulation
is valid. Just as today’s dominant civilization—capitalist modernity—rests
upon Indo-European cultural roots, the Indo-European culture rests upon
Aryan cultural roots and its Sumerian and Egyptian branches.

Of course the issues we are trying to analyze are not solely a matter of
culture and civilization. But, if we do not determine the relative contribution
culture and civilization made to social development, historiography
will indeed be no more than “the trivia of the past” from which nothing
meaningful can be learnt. Such numerical records of the succession of
religions, dynasties, kings, wars and peoples are no more than ideological
efforts to disguise social development and to prepare the social memory
and mind for exploitation by the rulers. Without correctly identifying
the main source of our civilization and its branches, we will not be able
to understand today’s society nor solve its problems. Even if we wish to
understand and end the atrocities in today’s Iraq, we need to acknowledge
that our knowledge of sociology and historiography has failed. Only then
may we be able to propose a new framework for historical and sociological
analysis that will render meaningful results. All am trying to do here is to
make a small contribution to end this human tragedy.

A further point of criticism against my analysis was my claim that
Kurds are descendants of the Aryan language and cultural group—it was
felt that, because Hitler laid claim to the notion of Aryanism, it may have
a “racist” connotation. Let me just ask this in return: Because Hitler’s
political party was the National Socialist Party, does this mean we should
abandon the word socialism? Fascism quite successfully utilized various
scientific and ideological notions for its own benefit, but this doesn't
mean that we should abandon science and ideology. I have no intentions
of fostering a nationalism based on Aryan language and culture. On the

contrary, I have argued strongly against nationalism,

"

 
 

The Main Sources of Civilization

I am compelled to summarize the arguments I set out in Prison

Writings: The Roots of Civilization:

a. Both the formation of a language and its being the foundation of a deep

rooted culture depends on the historical and geographical preconditions.
The period 10,000 to 4,000 BCE defines the “long term” (la longue durée)
in which this language and cultural group institutionalized itself. During
this period various inventions such as pottery, the plough, animals for
farming, the wheel, weaving, manual grinders, arts and religion were
institutionalized. A rich list of plant and animal products enabled the
great increase in the population. Metals were not only used for tools,

it was used to make rich works of art during the Chalcolithic period
(Copper Age). We are still discovering examples of these today—houses
and religious architecture made of hewn stone and many tools made of
metals have been recovered from the archaeological sites of Bradostiyan
at the skirts of Zagros, Cayonii (Diyarbakir) and finally Gobeklitepe
(near Urfa) which is said to date back 11,000 years.

The cultural tools and words used even today by the local people to
name these tools shed light on the identity of the core region. Words
such as geo (location), ard (location, soil, field), jin (woman, life), roj
(the sun), bra (brother), mur (death), sol (shoes), neo (new), ga (0x),
gran (large, heavy), mesh (to walk), guda (god) are still used in European
languages. These words are also used by Middle Eastern and Central
Asian peoples such as the Kurds, Persians, Balochi and others—clues
that the Aryan language and cultural group is not of European or Indian
origin. Sumerian tablets and other archaeological findings prove that this
culture has existed at least around six thousand years ago, when Europe
and India were still in the “Old Stone Age””

. While I do not wish to deny the rich contribution of the Semitic
language and cultural group, I cannot envisage that around 4,000 BCE
the shepherd culture could have led to urban civilization culture.

Although the civilization of the Egyptian Pharaohs is in the Semitic
region, one cannot find evidence of contributions from the Semitic
culture. The Egyptian documents also show that the Semitic culture is
foreign to them, There are no similarities in the language structures. The

75

 
Manifesto for a Democratic Civilization

Semitic culture takes its initial place in the written history around 2,500
BCE with the Akkadian, Babylonian, Assyrian, Canaan and Hebrew
identities. The Arabic identity can be seen much later in history—around
500 BCE. Conceptualizations such as Arameans, Amorites and Habirus
have first been used by the Sumerians and the Egyptians. It is thought
that Phoenicians, Palestinians and even Hebrews have been integrated
into the Semitic language and culture group at a later stage (as with the
ngptian Pharaoh culture). There is evidence that they initially had been
immersed in the Aryan culture, but that they lost this identity under
waves of Semitic migration.

The Sumerian sources and various archaeological records indicate
that Semitic language and culture groups have attacked or migrated
to the Aryan language and cultural region, possibly as far back as
5,000 BCE. Akkadians, Babylonians, Assyrians, Arameans and Arab
colonies especially left their traces in Upper Mesopotamia. However,
Assyrian and Arabic influences are much greater than the others. (When
combined with Islam, it meant a greater force of assimilation, as Islam
and Arabization are intertwined.) The Aryan language and culture group
was able to resist these efforts of colonization, assimilation and incursion
by counter attack, incursion, colonization and assimilation. The initial
founders of the Sumerian civilization, leaders of the Egyptian civilization
as well as the Hyksos and the Hebrews are examples of this.’

I think that the most acceptable interpretation is that the initial
leaders of the Sumerians migrated to Lower Mesopotamia, carrying the
Aryan core culture with them and transforming it to a more advanced
level. This Aryan culture reached its peak in the Upper Mesopotamian
region— Tell Halaf—around 6,000-4,000 BCE. Thus, the Sumerians
should be viewed as responsible for the cultural expansion of the Tell
Halaf era instead of some migrating groups. It does not make sense to
look for Central Asian or Caucasian influences, as at the beginning of
the Sumerian civilization (around 5,000 BCE): these areas were still in
the Stone Age and had just begun encountering the Aryan culture. At the
time, they simply had no means to sustain a culture such as that of the
Sumerians. Physically, they would not have been able to overcome the

Aryans,

76
—-

 
 

The Main Sources of Civilization

Just as European culture is propagated all around the world today,
the Aryan language and culture too was propagated around the world,
especially after it completed its institutionalization and experienced a
population boom (especially in the Tell Halaf period between 6,000~
4,000 BCE). Just as today a variety of poor cultural groups and laborers
are lured to the safety that Europe offers, at the time such groups arrived
in the Fertile Crescent and the Sumerian zone.

. 'Thus, the Arian culture established and institutionalized itself at the

 

Fertile Crescent. From there it moved further to the east—to the regions
that are today called Iran, Afghanistan, Pakistan and India. I must
emphasize that it was not the groups of people that migrated but the
culture itself. Initial signs of this culture are encountered around 7,000
BCE in the Iranian plateaus and the culture was effective in India around
4,000 BCE. Its influence reached the Turkmenistan plateaus around
5,000 BCE. There is a school of thought that claims the previous cultural
layer there had been of African Stone Age descent.® Cultural remnants
seem to substantiate this thesis. Just as in Egypt and Sumer, there is no
theoretical or empirical evidence of a culture in this region that is solely
the product of local development.

Although some of my critics find this line of argumentation too
reductionist, we should keep in mind that a limited number of cultural
revolutions took place in history and that those were achieved only with
the greatest difficulty. Furthermore, though European culture is quite
unique in the world, the above-mentioned culture did have similarities
with European culture and with the culture of the Fertile Crescent. In the
third place, there is no theoretical evidence or archaeological remains
indicating that groups that have lived according to the same habits for
hundreds of thousands of years or groups that are at the threshold of
being annihilated suddenly could come up with a fundamental cultural
revolution. Hence we can assume that there was a cultural expansion
to the east around 3,000 BCE leading to the urban civilization centered
on Susa to the west of Iran in the Elam region. This expansion we can
assume originated from Sumer. Further east, the establishment of the
cities of Harappa and Moenjo-daro (at the shores of the Punjab River
in today’s Pakistan) in around 2,500 BCE, also embodied Sumerian

7

 
Manifesto for a Democratic Civilization

influences. It is impossible to reason that they were the original
institutions of some other cultural structures. If this were the case, then
one would need to question why thousands of other groups at much
more fertile geographical locations were unable to develop a civilization
or a grand cultural revolution.

Undoubtedly, each and every region would have made its own
contributions. Expansion and local acceptance of the culture is
intertwined and mostly voluntary. Expansion is not that of the
exploitative groups but rather of the more advanced material and moral
values of production. The expansionist cultures that have demonstrated
their abilities in this regard have always been seen as “sacred miracles
of the gods.” It is important that we do not confuse cultural expansion
that elevates the value of life both morally and materially with that of
colonialism, occupation and forced assimilation. In fact, only a small
number of cultural expansions have been achieved through brutal
attacks, colonialism, and forced assimilation. The majority were accepted
because they brought an advanced quality of life. However, because of
the narrow nationalistic conceptualizations of history, the concept of
cultural expansion is still not well understood. It is important not to fall
into the traps of nationalism, which lead to denial, exaggeration, disguise
and distortion—especially here, where we are attempting to establish a
meaningful method of obtaining and interpreting knowledge.

d. The relationship between the Aryan language and culture groups and
that of the Indo-European language and culture groups may be one of
the main problems of historiography and therefore it is important to
determine this relationship. There has been much speculation on this
topic but a common interpretation has not been attained. In the 19th
century, when it became clear that the Indo-European languages had
much in common, much research was done. Various interpretations
were made in relation to the main source of these groups. Some said
the source was Greek or Indian while others claimed it to be North
European or Germanic.

Establishing that all modern humans originated from the East
African Rift and that the Neolithic-agricultural revolution took place in
the Fertile Crescent excludes many possible hypotheses, The next step

78

—————A—_
The Main Sources of Civilization

is to establish which language and culture group was the original group
in the Fertile Crescent during the Neolithic. As argued above, the proto-
Kurdish, Persian, Afghan and Balochi groups gained prominence as the
Aryan groups of the time. Furthermore, a better understanding of the
language structure of the Hurrians—the proto-Kurds—broadened our
insight of the Aryan language and cultural identity. Thus, I postulate that
this is the language and culture that formed the core of the Neolithic
revolution, and that this language and culture formed the center of the
Aryan language and culture group.

It can be assumed that, similar to the expansion to the south and
east, there would have been an expansion to the north and west—toward
Europe. This wave of expansion is estimated to have begun around 5,000
BCE and to have been completed in 4,000 BCE in Eastern Europe and
around 2,000 BCE in Western Europe. This is now the main opinion
and many important historians, including V. Gordon Childe, date the
beginning of European history to this timeframe. Prior to this period is
the period of “Old Stone Age.” It is estimated that around thirty thousand
years ago Homo Sapiens became the dominant species in the region -
between the South of France and Spain with roots in Northern Africa.
Thus, its expansion around the world was most probably during the
Mesolithic period or the middle part of the stone age.

| am not about to embark on an examination of the European Neolithic
and the agricultural revolution. But because of the importance of what the
main source is, we need to shed some light on it. Again, I propose that the
expansion to the west was not physical or colonial but cultural. However,
Europe is unique in that it had absorbed the Neolithic period with all its
creative aspects. It digested an accumulation of around ten thousand years
In a short period of time. Just as Western Europe has turned the modern
world into a cultural expansion region over the past four hundred years, it
was once the region of expansion of, initially, the Neolithic culture from
the Fertile Crescent, then the Roman civilization and finally the Christian
revolution. The expansive bases for all these three big revolutions in
Furope were cultural more than anything else. Expansion was not based
on colonization, imperialism and forced assimilation alone. It has mostly

9

 
Manifesto for a Democratic Civilization

been achieved through the acceptance of the more advanced cultures
as “god’s gift” As a result, the foundation for the later “Big Revolutions”
of Europe has already been laid (such as the Renaissance, Reformation,
Enlightenment, Political, Industrial, and Scientific Revolutions). Europe
did not have special talents with which it created these big revolutions.
They resulted from the core and peripheral cultures. On the other hand,
the retreat of the Ice Age brought weather conditions quite suitable for all
kinds of development. The synthesis of all these conditions has paved the
way for a civilization that has determined our future.

Interpreting the Evolution of Social Structures in the Fertile Crescent

In this section, I will look at the effects that the time and location of a
specific social development have on a specific way of life.

As explained in Section I of this book, social realities are constructed by
human beings. If we do not fully understand this, all attempts to acquire the
knowledge and understanding needed to construct a meaningful life will
only result in ignorance and meaninglessness. I repeat that our ignorance
in the time of capitalist modernity is worse than it was at the onset of the
major religions and that the fundamental reason for this is positivism.’

Adorno’s statement “Wrong life cannot be lived rightly” (Es gibt
kein richtiges Leben im falschen), although used to express his dismay
with the Jewish Holocaust, applies to life in modernity in general. What
then, is the fundamental mistake that caused this wrong life? Adorno has
linked the root of the problem to the period of Enlightenment and to
Rationalism. However, he did not attempt to clarify the problem itself—
the form of life that is wrong. Who is responsible for it? How has it been
constructed? What is its relationship with the dominant social system?
Similarly, Michel Foucault states that “Modernity is the death of man”
but leaves it there, without investigating this critical subject further.®

It is not enough to just blame modernity. In the first place, can only
life constructed by capitalist modernity be described as wrong? Was the
life enforced by previous civilizations right? Were not the Sumerian priests
and god-kings, the Egyptian god-kings, the Iranian Khosrows, Alexander
the Great, the Roman Empire, the Islamic sultans and European monarchs

w i -

    
 
The Main Sources of Civilization

all responsible for constructing life on the wrong foundations? Were

not links in the chain around the neck of social development whereby the
foundations of wrong life were strengthened? It is not sufficient to put the
responsibility for the wrong life on modernity, its wars and genocidal order,
without further investigating what it was caused by and how it can be
rectified. Just as the root of the problem, its solution is profound.

Although we cannot understand a society solely through its culture—
many elements need to be included in its definition—culture is at the
basis of any society. But what do I mean by culture?

A culture, in a narrow sense, is the mentality, forms of thought and
language of a particular society. In a broader sense, the material gains
(the tools and devices used to satisfy the needs for production, storage
and processing of food, for transportation, worshipping and beautifying,
etc.) form part of its culture. The similarities and the differences between
the mentalities and devices of different cultures determine to what degree
their life styles correspond.

Generally speaking, the social realities constructed in the Fertile
Crescent during the Neolithic are still in existence today. Both the
mental and the material cultural elements—despite some quantitative
and qualitative changes—are essentially still the same. In essence, the
languages spoken today are the same in terms of their main structure.
The mental effort is still divided between the fields of science, religion and
art. Defensive and offensive wars existed then and are still waged today.
The family structure continues to be the fundamental social institution.
The differences are due to the growth of the state institution. The state has
continuously expanded its field of operation against society. As it began
to take possession of the mental and material cultural accumulation it
has changed these constructs qualitatively and quantitatively. Contrary
to belief, social developments have been achieved despite the state. I will
continue to point out the consequences that the state formations (from
the very beginning of the Sumerian priest-state to the nation-state of the
capitalist modernity) had on society and what the real function was of
the civilization that grew from these formations.

[ believe that the role of Fernand Braudel’s concept of plural
temporalities (different modes of periodization, different time scales) in

81

 
Manifesto for a Democratic Civilization

social development has not been analyzed sufficiently. Especially Braudel’s
notions of longue durée (a historical relation that allows an open and
experimental approach to the theoretical reconstruction of long-term,
large-scale world historical change) and structural time (that is, historical
temporalities beyond direct human or social intervention) in relation to
culture, civilization and society can make a strong contribution to our
understanding of history. In the discussion that follows, I will attempt

to apply these notions to the social development in the Fertile Crescent. |

a.La longue durée

For the society of the Fertile Crescent, la longue durée implies the perlod
starting with the end of the fourth ice age and ending when it can no longer
continue its physical existence due to some natural or nuclear disaster.” -
Cultures with Chinese and Semitic roots have taken their place within this
longue durée society as two branches. Other smaller cultural branches also
take their place within this main river as streams. It is important that the
logic of the thesis is well understood: The constructed society is so strong,
together with its mental and material cultural elements, that no internal
social event can destroy it within this duration. I will thus refer to the
society of the longue durée as the “fundamental cultural society.”
Inmyopinion, thisinterpretation of duration and society can contribute
much to social science. Liberal sociologists, through the construction of
a false metaphysics, wish to enforce their societal conception formulated
as the end of history to be eternally valid.'” Marxist and other messianic
approaches promise all an era of eternal prosperity, detached of time and
location. The notion of long duration is much more scientific than all
these social theories. It presents understandable arguments not only for
concrete conditions but also for both the beginning and end of the social
system. It neither congests history by treating it as a pile of events nor
does it fragment history by emphasizing the periodic existence of isolated
social forms. The meaning of life cannot be profoundly interpreted by
examining either instantaneous events or social forms in isolation.

Within the scope of la longue durée, there is room for various
fundamental institutions such as religion, state, art, law, economy and
politics in the fundamental cultural society. These institutions continuously

 
 

The Main Sources of Civilization

change both qualitatively and quantitatively. Some shrink dramatically and
in return its counterparts grow. While some diminish, their function is
continued either in other institutions or in the new ones. In more general
terms, there is a dialectical creative relationship between all its constructs
and institutions. The fact that there is a single main cultural society does
not deprive it of strong partners and new internal formations.

In the light of these concepts, we can better understand the quarrel
between the evolutionists and the creationists. The creationists are
aware of the longue durée; in fact, they gain their real strength from this
knowledge. We can explain the religious verses on the duration of god’s
creation of the universe and its end in cultural terms. If we, however,
interpret it sociologically, we see that the creationist perspective is aware
of the sacred, supreme and glorious characteristics of constructed society.
In fact, all three Holy Books of monotheistic religion, the Torah, Bible,
and Koran, are attempts to explain the captivating and “sacred” life at the
Fertile Crescent. Maybe the reason why the majority of humans belong
to these religions lies in the quality of these interpretations. These books
succeeded in turning into the fundamental belief of humanity the claim
that the new cultural life—which has “miraculously” occurred—will
continue eternally; an indication of just how influential this culture is.

Sociologists such as Emile Durkheim did not move beyond defining
society as groups of human beings who are the sum of events and
institutions. Class, state, economic, juridical, political, philosophical and
religious narratives cannot surpass the mentality of events and institutions.
However, these scientists never really question why these are not held to
be as precious as the Holy Books. Their main weakness is that they have
not understood the importance of the longue durée society. Humanity
possesses a profound memory of its own story and will not abandon it so
casily. The belief in the sacred religious books are not due to an abstract
god and some rituals, but because humans can feel the meaning and traces
of their own life story in these books. In fact, these books are the memory
of living society. Thus, whether the events and notions in them are true or
not is of secondary importance. Fernand Braudel draws our attention to a
fundamental methodological and scientific mistake with his apt comment
that “sociology and history make up one single intellectual adventure, not

83
Manifesto for a Democratic Civilization

two different sides of the same cloth but the very stuff of the cloth itself™"*
Unless we meaningfully determine the relationship between duration
and society, separate historical and sociological narratives will harm the
societal realities and their meanings.

Hence, even though the evolutionists have a much better understanding
of the events and processes involved, they will never free themselves of
criticism because they do not understand the notion of duration. Societal
memory is more important than the evolution of events and processes.
The reason why the god is not abandoned lies with the power of social
memory—society equates the concept of god to its past memory. In fact,
positivism is a disease of modernity and as long as it stands in the way
of society’s memory—and hence its metaphysics—it will not be free from
criticism. And rightly so, because societies that have lost their memories
are easily exploited, conquered and assimilated.

Although the positivists claim that they define society scientifically, this
school of thought least understands how society evolves. By interpreting
society as a history-less and vulgar materialistic pile, they pave the way for
many dangerous social operations. The idea of social engineering is also
related to positivism, as the positivists think they can shape society through
external intervention. This is also the understanding of modernity’s
officialdom, and thus it gives legitimacy to exploitative power and warfare.

b. Structural time

The concept of structural time can be applied to analyze the fundamental
institutional transformations in social development. If we define the
construction and collapse periods of fundamental structures in these
terms, we may obtain a better understanding of social realities. Humanity
has a history of oppression and exploitation, and differentiating between
slave-owning, feudal, capitalist and socialist societies may be the subject
of a meaningful discourse. In fact, relating structural time to these social
forms has led to a considerable literature. However, because no meaningful

connection between the long and short terms has been made, such
discourse cannot be very productive and turns into repetitive clichés.

A meaningful analysis of Neolithic society can be made by
investigating the interrelationship between the structural term and the

 
 

The Main Sources of Civilization

fundamental cultural society term. Neolithic society has its own unique
institutional structures, mentality and accumulation of material life that
can be explained in terms of structural time, but it can also be explained
through the concept long term because of its cultural influences that will
exist until there is a physical destruction or collapse. Science, religion,
arts, language, family, ethnicity and peoples as well as the different forms
of mentality and diverse human groups—who go through various changes
but will most probably always exist—constitute the fundamental cultural
society, that is to say the long term. In addition, ecology must definitely
be a subject of concern. It must be interrelated to the conclusions drawn
from all the other branches of science. It can be examined as science
of economic institutionalization. Democratic politics needs also to be
continuously kept alive as a science and as an institution.

The fundamental institution of a structural term is the establishment
and life of a state as well as those things that originated during its
existence, such as hierarchy, classes and state borders as well as property,
territory and homeland. Different forms of state, such as the priest-state,
dynastic state, republic and nation-state, mark some of the important
topics. Different types of religion also constitute an important subject.
Propositions that distinguish societies based on their mode of production
(Neolithic, slave-owning, feudal, capitalist, socialist), as well as the
collapse of institutions, can also be regarded within the structural term.

¢, Medium and short term

The medium- and short-term matters consist of qualitative and quantitative
multiple events and notions."? The subject matter of the short and medium
term is all the cultural and structural changes and transformations of
events. The medium term is involved with changes that take place within
the same structural institution. Economic depressions, political regime
changes, the establishment of various types of organizations (economical,
social, political, and operational) are examples of such changes. The
main topics of the short term are all the various social (and socialization)
activities of the individual. The media is usually concerned with the short
term events and notions. The daily events in each structural institution are
also within the compass of the short term.

85

 
Manifesto for a Democratic Civilization

There really should be a branch of sociology that examines the
influence of events. Since it will base itself upon events within the short
term, it could be called the August Comte sociology. It may be suitable to
call it “positive sociology” (without ignoring the fundamental criticism
directed against positivism). Especially during chaotic periods, events
gain significance and become a determining factor. I believe that only
when the fundamental cultural sociology, structural sociology and
positive sociology are united shall we achieve the integrality of sociology.

In addition, all universal events and formations, including social
events, require a quantum or chaotic environment because they are
the moments of creation. Although they have not been profoundly
examined, they definitely do exist. Science is each day more concerned
with the fundamental issue of how the “occurrences” of both “each
instant” and “short intervals” sustain all long, medium and short-term
formations. We should not neglect the “quantum moment” and the
“chaos interval” as these can be seen as “moments of creation.” The
possibility of freedom in the universe occurs at this “moment” and is
thus itself related to the “moment of creation.” All structures in nature
and society, whether in the case of their construction, sustenance or
period of life—despite their different qualities—require “moments of
creation.” There is thus a need to find a name for the sociology that
is concerned with the issues of creation at the shortest possible term.
I propose the name sociology of freedom for the sociology that deals
with the moment of creation in social events. Moreover, I think it is a
necessity to have sociology of freedom as a branch of sociology. It could
also be viewed as the sociology of mentality because of the incredible
flexibility of the human mind—due to socialization—and the creativity
that has resulted from it. At the top of the list of subjects to examine
should be thought and the desire for freedom. We should add that
the development at the moment of creation is a development with a
component of freedom—hence such a discipline could also be called
sociology of creation. Since this shortest quantum moment and chaos
interval encompass the entire social field, the sociology of freedom
should be at the top of the list of all the sociology subjects that are in
need of urgent development.

 
The Main Sources of Civilization

Let us then investigate the developments at the Fertile Crescent
through this perspective. I will try to implement the method of sociological
examination as I go along. However, it should be kept in mind that this
examination is experimental and thus can have only experimental value.

In terms of social history, the sociology of freedom observes the
most fecund chaos interval in the Fertile Crescent during the Neolithic
revolution. The groups that used to sustain themselves through hunting
and gathering now embarked on a quest to sustain themselves in settled
life through farming. The old clan communities, hundreds of thousands of
years old, are replaced with broader structures. This marks an enormous
mental transition. Instead of the old clan mentality and the language
structure, we see the transition to a broader mentality of people sharing
a village and of ethnicity. The introduction of numerous nutriments,
means of transport, weaving, grinding, architecture, religious and artistic
matters necessitate new mental forms and a new order of nomenclature.

The new society is now based mostly on village life and the clan ties
transform into ethnic ties. The new material structures could not have
been sustained without a more meaningful mental framework. Although
the totem (the identity of the old clan society) continues its existence, the
symbol of the Neolithic society is the mother-goddess. In time, the size of the
totems decrease and the size of the mother-goddess’ figures increase. This
symbolizes the increasing role of woman. This is a higher level of religious
realization and it results in the formation of a very rich conceptualization.
Grammatically, the female suffix becomes dominant—a characteristic that
can still be observed in many languages. An intensely sacred meaning is
bestowed on the mother-goddess as well as on socialization.

The new society also means new notions and nomenclature. Since
mental revolution requires creativity, we need to examine this in the
sociology of freedom. Historians like V. Gordon Childe suggest that such
a period has indeed been experienced.'* The occurrence of thousands of
events means thousands of mental revolutions and names. History shows
us that the majority of the terminologies and inventions that we utilize
today were created in this period. Religion, arts, science, transportation,
architecture, grain, fruits, animal husbandry, weaving, pottery, grinding,
kitchens, feasts, family, hierarchy, administration, defense and assault,

87

 
Manifesto for a Democratic Civilization

gifts, farming tools and many other concepts, tools and their related terms
continue to exist as the fundamentals of society despite obvious changes.
Examining the structure of the village and family of the Neolithic period
shows that the most treasured moral values, the values that strengthened
society, were societal morals such as respect, affection, neighborly
relations and solidarity. These are much more precious than the capitalist
modernity’s moral values. Society’s fundamental forms of mentality are
the remnants of this period and they will never lose their value.

From the perspective of positive sociology, the events of that period are
also quite rich. When compared with the clan society’s monotonous life of
hunting, gathering and defense, the events and new notions that developed
in the Fertile Crescent are manifold and very exciting. It can be deduced
from the narratives of the Holy Books that the fundamental meaning carried
over from those times in the minds of the people had later developed into
the concept of paradise. This is the most prosperous moment of positive
sociology and humanity is faced with an incredible development.

In terms of structural sociology, one could see at the Fertile Crescent the
traces of all the institutional orders that resulted in societal development.
The period from 6,000 to 4,000 BCE in particular was a period of
institutionalization. Areas for villages and cities had been determined and
settled, hierarchy was born, religion was institutionalized, sanctuaries
appeared, ethnicity came into being, customs for interpersonal relations
were established and administration on the basis of morality was at its
peak. It appeared as if Neolithic society and its agricultural and village
revolution came to stay. The social structures that form the backbone of
structural sociology exhibited theses strong formation for the first time
at the Fertile Crescent during the Neolithic. Much can be learned by
examining these original institutions. In fact, studying these structures of
the region—the initial institutionalized values of humanity—will enable
us to draw sound conclusions about the establishment of structural
sociology. Today’s structural sociology has a serious lack of meaning. If it
is revised as a component of general sociology, it can become an effective,
meaningful branch of sociology.

The language and culture whose foundation was laid at the Fertile
Crescent is an original source and is a subject for fundamental cultural

 
 

The Main Sources of Civilization

sociology. The society established in the region is a very long term society.
As mentioned earlier, unless through some natural disaster human life
deteriorates to a major degree, the social culture and civilization based
in the Fertile Crescent has the capacity to continue to play a leading role.
Although in terms of capacity it is not impossible for a civilization based
on Chinese or Semitic culture to become a hegemonic power, practically it
will be very difficult. There were very big Islamic and Mongolian originated
assaults, yet the Indo-European culture (hence the Aryan language and
culture which is the source culture) has never lost its hegemonic character.

Fundamental cultural sociology may be equated with general
sociology. We may thus consider topics such as mental formats, family
institution and the change and transition of the ethnic-national entities
under general sociology. More importantly, the chaos and decay
environments that are encountered and that are the base as well as the
result of both the sociology of freedom and structural sociology, can also
be examined under general sociology.

The second phase of society that arose at the Fertile Crescent began
with the Sumerian Priest State, which is also the onset of “civilized
society.” Civilized society is in fact based on the culture present at the
Fertile Crescent, bu t with hierarchic and dynastic roots from elsewhere.
The state was seen as the Leviathan in the Holy Books.

In the next section, I will examine the bloody, exploitative and at
times genocidal march of this monster. I will also look at different forms
of exploitation—whether they are under the rule of masked, unmasked,
disguised or naked kings—as well as at the ways these kings have
managed to legitimize themselves.

Conclus;on

The fundamental postulate of this section is that communality as a
constructed reality is a human creation. Despite our criticism, there
are things that we have and can learn from this fragmented state of
the sciences. The reason behind my frequent emphasis on the distinct
perception level of social reality is to clarify its difference with other
sciences. Without understanding this difference, we will not escape

89

 
Manifesto for a Democratic Civilization

but fall into the scientism of the positivists that have resulted in the
genocides of capitalist modernity. Genocide was the great crime that
Adorno based his term “wrong life” on. Positivism holds that despite
these genocides communal life can be sustained. What I am attempting
here is to expose the sources that made this “imprudence” possible and
to look for possible methods of transcending these sources, so that we
can gain an understanding and identify the appropriate steps to take. We
cannot ignore the fact that the continuing existence of modernity leads
to institutionalized centers of genocide. The example right before us, the
reality of Iraq, shows all of us—not only those who burn in it but also
those who observe it from outside—that all the regimes in the Middle
East are partners in this crime, whether it be overt or covert. On the
other hand, there is also the quest for free life. Free life or genocide—
this cannot be an acceptable alternative. We cannot be partners in this
crime by living the way we do. How did it happen that this region and
history that led to such a meaningful life ended up as it did? With, on
the one hand, the wars between the ethnicities that have led to the initial
meaning of life, and on the other hand, the wars for leadership of the last
great god of modernity? It seems clear that we cannot move on if this
issue is not thoroughly addressed.

I feel obliged to express the taste of life in the Fertile Crescent in a
more literary way. Let me begin with a quotation by Robert . Braidwood,
who initiated the excavations at Gayonu (Diyarbakir). He said, “Life
could not have been more meaningful than at the skirts of the arching
range of the Zagros-Taurus Mountains” I really wonder what it was that
made this person, grown up in the distant cultures of today, say such a

 

thing. As an archaeologist and a historian who knows this civilization
best, why has he seen the most meaningful life of all to be that of this
cultural region? Despite this observation, today’s inhabitants wish to flee
from this land to Europe as if to run away from plague, even though it
means working for the lowest wages. They look at migration as if it is
their destiny, as if there is no sacred or aesthetic value left in this region,
as if there is nothing that can once again be attained.

[ admit, at some stage I too fell for the disease of modernity and wanted
to flee from everything, including from my mother and father. I often
9%

_——
The Main Sources of Civilization

admit to myself that this was my biggest delusion in life. However, I had
not totally detached myself from what Braidwood observed. As a child of
those skirts, I always thought the peaks of the mountains to be the sacred
throne of the gods and goddesses, and its skirts to be the cornerstones
of heaven that they created in plenitude and I always wanted to wander
around. As a young boy, because of this, I was described as “mad for
mountains.” When I learnt much later that such a life was reserved for the
god Dionysus and the free and artistic groups of girls (the Bacchantes)
; who travelled before and behind him, I really envied him. It is said that
the philosopher Nietzsche preferred this god to Zeus and that he would
even sign many of his works as the “disciple of Dionysus.” When I was
still at my village, I always wanted to play games with the girls of my
village. Although this did not conform to the religious rules, I have
always thought that this was the most natural thing. I never approved
of the dominant culture’s way of shutting women behind doors. I still
want to engage with them in unlimited free discussions, in games, in all
the sacredness of life. I still say an unconditional “no” to the slavery and
bonds that smell of possession and that is based on power relations.

I remember how I have always saluted the free women of these
mountains with the morning breeze of goddesses and how we tried to
understand one another. I also remember the unique anger I have always
felt against men—family, clan and state—for the deaths of truckloads of
south-eastern women who died in car crashes on their way to other regions
for seasonal work. How is it possible that they fell this low from being the
descendants of the goddess? My mind and soul have never accepted their
fall. T have always thought that a woman should either have the sacredness
of a goddess or not be at all. I agree with the statement that “the degree of
emancipation of woman is the natural measure of general emancipation.”"*

To me, my mother always was reminiscent of the mother goddess.
But then modernity’s construction of a superficial mother veiled the
sacredness within her to my eyes. Although I experienced extraordinary
pain in my life, I have never seriously cried about anything. But now, in
the aftermath of shattering the constructs of modernity, I remember my
mother and all the mothers of the region with tears and sadness. Now,
I again value the meaning of the water I used to drink from the copper

N

L——-L————————_—_
Manifesto for a Democratic Civilization

buckets that my mother carried home with such difficulty. They are my
most vivid and my saddest memories.

I plead that everyone will reconsider their relationship with their
mother and father after having shattered modernity in their own minds.
And then for everyone to reflect upon all of their relationships in the
village from the same perspective. The biggest success of modernity is
its achievement in shattering the fifteen thousand year old constructed
culture and reducing it to nothing. Of course one cannot expect a noble
and free perspective, resistance and passion for life from individuals and
communities that have been shattered and reduced to nothing.

The flora and fauna on the skirts of the Arch’s mountains have
always been objects of passion for me. I used to consider them sacred.
The one thing I can still not forgive myself for is snapping off the heads
of the birds I hunted without any pity. There is no better example of
the profound danger embedded within the object-subject dichotomy
modernity enforced on us. My concern for the ecology is strongly related
to this passion and the crime of my childhood. My only remedy was to
pull down the masks of the “strong exploiter and ruling man” who is
a mere hunter and whose only talent is power relations and warring.
Unless we understand the language of the fauna and flora, we will neither
understand ourselves nor become ecological socialists.

I have the most intense feelings when I remember how the valleys that
began at the skirts of the mountains were prepared for production from
the onset of spring to the onset of autumn by my farmer father. I cannot
forgive myself for the inability to mourn his death—an inability brought
on by the relationships imposed by modernity. 1 have big regrets: Why
could not I fully understand these travelers of god and befriend them?

At one time, I thought that the moment for village relationships had
come and gone. Today, I have no doubt that the ideal life for humanity can
only be sustained in the villages that are in harmony with the ecology—not
in the city structures of modernity. The only way that cities can become fit
for human dwelling is to transform them into ecological villages.

To my mind, the people living in the range of the Nur and Zagros
mountains are the sacred passengers of the gods and goddesses who
reside at the thrones located at the peaks of the mountains.'* I reject the

 

9 | |
The Main Sources of Civilization

insult, from the perspective of modernity, of being “backward” because
progressiveness and backwardness are just ideological judgments. I not only
think that modernity is backward, but I also believe that a profound analysis
of capitalist modernity’s mentality (which I view as an enemy of humanity)
will lead us back to the fundamentals of humanity. When we rid ourselves
of modernity’s hellish shackles, namely profiteering, industrialism and
the nation-state, we will be able to live a meaningful life again. The city—
that has opened its doors to the life of profit, the capture of the human
being in an iron cage and the industrial monsters that are the murderers of
life—is an even more meaningless copy of the old “Babylon with seventy
two languages.” I have no doubt that the liberation of humanity lies in the
collapse of the cancerous structure of this kind of urbanism. And I do
believe that I was able to make the grand return to freedom.

[ have told this short story to evoke memories of the life-culture that
is our roots. We need to fully and effectively understand the lifestyle that
is the product of this constructed social reality before we can escape
playing the role of modernity’s fool. If we do not rid ourselves of this
cancerous life of modernity that has taken all of us hostage—including
the shepherd in the mountains—we cannot live a free life. We shall,
sooner or later, understand that “the wrong life cannot be lived rightly.”

93

 
Section 3

Urban Civilized society

The Age of Masked Gods and Disquised Kings

The most critical damage resulting from positivism (capitalist modernity’s
official ideology) lies in the area of the social sciences. In the name of
being scientific, the reductionist objectification of social phenomena has
created problems that will not be easily overcome. Scientific socialism’s
employment of this method in the study of the social and economic areas '
has complicated the problems associated with establishing a meaningful
scientific method to such a degree that it will be very difficult to resolve. The
mental attitude resulting from this physical approach has given capitalism
the strength that no weaponry could. Opening up the proletariat and the
poor to the study of society through its objectification and inducing within
them a mindset that accepts such an approach has disarmed them from the
outset. But the scientific socialists are not even aware of this. We will tryto
show that to conceptualize society as a phenomenon like the biological or
even physical nature is to already surrender to capitalist modernity.

It is with pain and anger that I have to admit that the noble struggle
that has raged for the past one hundred and fifty years was carried out

94

 
Urban Civilized Society

on the basis of a vulgar, materialist positivism doomed to failure. The
class struggle underlies this approach. However, the class—contrary to
what they believe—is not the workers and laborers resisting enslavement,
but the petit bourgeoisie who long ago surrendered and became part
of modernity. Positivism is the ideology that has formed this class’s
perception and underlies its meaningless reaction against capitalism.
This class of urban tradesmen is totally ignorant of the way society is
really formed and has always been the basis of forming unproductive
factions. Ideologically, they constitute a social stratum easily defended by
the dominant official order.

The social approach of positivism can be seen as contemporary
idolatry. In fact, idolatry is worshipping a divinity which has lost its
meaning. In the past, the concept of divinity served enchanting and sacred
functions for society and the loss of these functions constitutes idolatry. It
is understandable that those lacking insight in this matter worship idols.
They do not realize that the need for idols lies in the functionality of the
idols. On the contrary, they believe that idolatry will produce meaning
and hence equal the sacredness and supremacy of believe in divinity. It
might be quite enlightening to analyze the anti-idol religions. I have no
doubt that those positivists who restrict themselves to positive facts and
phenomena are nothing but contemporary idolaters.

Marx and his school attempted to evaluate society, history, the arts,
law and even religion by means of economic analysis. But let us not
forget that social institutions are also constructs of the human mind. The
human mind continuously produces meaning and willpower in a social
environment. The mind administers society. Hence, societal economy is
also a product of the mind.

- I must reiterate that, to make a meaningful contribution, it is of
the utmost importince that we look at sociology from a historical
perspective and history from a sociological perspective. One of
the advantages of this method is that it comes close to a realistic
Interpretation of history—history as it happened. I do not deny the
Importance of speculative thought but for speculative thought to be
beneficial, we have to understand how history has truly evolved. This

cannot be done by proclaiming “history is determined by infrastructure”

95

 
Manifesto for a Democratic Civilization

or “history consists of the state’s actions.” Such an approach cannot
explain what happened in history and thus in society. This amounts to
social physiology and not understanding history. Explaining how social
institutions (the “tissues” in physiology) have effected or determined
one another cannot be considered a narrative of history. It is indeed a
very vulgar positivism.

The key to obtaining a meaningful interpretation of history is to
determine how the power of its flow is achieved at the instant of that
flow. What is important is to understand the nature of the mental attitude
and willpower effective at that specific instant in history—whether it
is economically or religiously driven. Metaphorically speaking, what
is important is not the kind of weapon that was used but the moment
the weapon was triggered by the hand. This is the true interpretation of
history. As those who have had strategic responsibilities in history well
know, history is a weapon always at the ready.

This introduction, before I embark on the history of civilization, is
an attempt to ensure that the question of method is not disregarded—it
is an attempt at making some contribution to epistemology, the science
of knowledge. The value of an interpretation does not only lie in its
power to explain history. For those who can influence history, the value
lies in how it can be utilized. For the victims of history—the oppressed
and exploited—the real value would be realizing that they can attain the
power to obtain their freedom, the recapturing of their willpower. If an
interpretation of history eternally condemns the victims to the victors
or if it forestalls liberation with the dictum “in no time liberation will be
achieved” then, despite the fact that they claim to represent the victims,
the analysts are, at the least, gravely mistaken.

An Analysis of the Sumerian Society

I am searching for the answer to the following question: How can the
Sumerian example be utilized when interpreting history? In other words:
How can it contribute both to clarity of method and to our understanding
of history? Let us analyze the Sumerian example from multiple aspects to
see what we can learn,

 
Urban Civilized Society
a. Intertwining functions of the Zigqurat

The Sumerian civilization developed in the alluvium rich region where
the Tigris and Euphrates rivers met in Lower Mesopotamia. Further
to the north, during the Tell Halaf period (6,000-4,000 BCE), the
institutionalization phase of the Neolithic period had taken place. During
this period, for the first time, abundant and diverse food resources
were procured. This revolution resulted not only from newly developed
production techniques but also from village society itself, as it was this new
societal form that had given rise to the mentality that led to the discovery
of these techniques. Sedentary life brought not only agriculture but also
the development of social institutions that nurtured one another. (In
a sense, institutionalization is the organization of social mentality—it is
being collective.) Archaeological findings in Upper Mesopotamia point to
many village settlements that were on the brink of developing into cities.
However, limited irrigation and dependence on rainwater constrained
further expansion and population growth. On the other hand, the Lower
Tigris and Euphrates presented favorable areas for irrigation and fertile
and plentiful soil. So, around 5,000 BCE, the initial village settlers of
Lower Mesopotamia arrived from the North, from the Tell Halaf culture.
Due to population growth villages spread out in all directions. As they
moved further to the South, the rainfall decreased and irrigation became
mandatory. This, in turn, required being extensively organized. The ideal
organization was achieved within the temples called the Ziggurats.

- The three intertwining functions of the Ziggurat are of key importance
for the understanding of Sumerian society. Its first function was to house
the field workers, who were owned by the Ziggurats, on the lowest floor.
This floor also housed the makers of the tools and various other devices.
Its second function was to host the priests, who did the administrative
duties, on the second flooraThe priests had to be in a position not only to
calculate the ever growing production but also to provide the legitimacy
(the persuasive power) to ensure cooperation from the workers. Thus,
they simultaneously had to administer the religious and the secular work.
The third function was to house the divinities, whose role was to influence
all spiritually, on the third floor (the original example of the pantheon?).
As argued in The Roots of Civilization, the Ziggurat functioned—to a

97

 
Manifesto for a Democratic Civilization

greater or lesser degree—as a model for later civilizations. This initial
model led to an urban society that now exceeds millions of people. It is
in fact the womb of all state-like organizations. Ziggurats, at the time,
were not only the center of the city but the city itself. Today’s cities too are
divided into three main parts: the temple (the house of the god) where
legitimacy is derived, a larger section for urban administration and the
largest section—dwellings for the workers.

The priest was the early entrepreneur: he was the capitalist, the
patron and the Agha of his time. He played a historical role as founder
of the city and ultimately the engineer of the new society. His task was
daunting. The period of forced enslavement had not begun and the
gathering of a workforce from people belonging to close knit clans and
ethnic groups was not as easy as today, when unemployment has become
institutionalized. His only possible advantage was the use of the god-
weapon. And this was the most extraordinary function of the priest: the
task to construct god. This task was of critical importance. Failure in this
regard would mean failure to construct the new city and society, and
therefore failure to produce an abundance of food. This is the reason why
the initial state administrators were priests.

The Ziggurats did not only have the task to re-invent and re-construct
the city, abundance of production and the new society, but a whole
world of concepts—including the concepts of god, calculation, magic,
science, arts, family, and even the initial exchange of product had to be
constructed. The priest was the initial social engineer, architect, prophet,
economist, businessman, foreman and King.

We need to look at the main tasks of the priest in more detail.

b. Constructing god

The most important task of the priest was constructing the new religion
and god. In my opinion, the missing link between totem worship and the
Abrahamic religions, that progressed beyond idolatry, is the Sumerian
priests’ invention of religion. This religion was a mixture of the god, that
is the power regulating the skies, and the totemic religion, that is the
power determining the identity of the society—the identity of both the
clan and the tribe.!

 
Urban Civilized Society

During the Neolithic, the driving force had been the mother-woman
to whom attributes of sacredness were ascribed—sacredness reminiscent
of the male priest of the Ziggurat. In the Ziggurat, totemic and celestial
representatives of god and the symbols of fertility and blessedness both
gained importance in the form of mother-goddesses. Later, the mother-
goddesses would become entangled in an extraordinary struggle with the
Sumerian priest-gods as witnessed in the main theme of the Sumerian
legends, namely the rivalry between the crafty male god Enki and the
leading female goddess Inanna.? Underlying this theme is the transition
from the Neolithic village society, which had not allowed exploitation,
to that of the urban society, newly constructed by the priests, which was
open to exploitation. This transition constituted a clash of interest. For
the first time serious social problems emerged (though, of course, the
terminology and notions involved were determined by the mindset of
the time). Society itself was represented as semi-divine—the human
mind was not yet able to conceive of an abstract identity.

At the time of the Ziggurat, nature was seen as animate, abounding with
gods and spirits.* Tampering with the deities could result in disaster. They
had to be approached with the utmost care and respect; sacrificial offers
were needed to pacify them. Pleasing the gods and other sacred entities
became so important that a tradition of sacrificing children and youths
developed in an effort to uphold society. The various types of relationships
between the human groupings of the time were reflected in the relationships
and conflicts between the sacred beings and gods. Lacking the modern-
day language of positive science, these notions were reflected in myths.
We should not forget that the language of positive science—or rather
the religion of positivism—has come into existence only in the past two
hundred years. Any attempt to interpret history should not omit this fact.

The struggle between Inanna and Enki thus reflected a crucial social
struggle. (Doubtlessly, this struggle had a material basis as well.) The fact
that the celestial god Enlil and the earthly god Enki were both masculine
reflected the coming into prominence of male power in the Sumerian urban
society. Masculinity was being transformed into sacredness, turned into
god. Maleness was viewed as so sacred that the new, holy male leader was
in fact society itself. As the Inanna belief had reflected the social strength

9

 
Manifesto for a Democratic Civilization

of the creative and leading power of the Neolithic—namely woman—the
priest class was being exalted in the new religion. This struggle remained
in equilibrium (although the balance in the Sumerian society turned to the
disadvantage of women) until around 2,000 BCE.

The priest reserved the top level of the Ziggurat for the gods, ever
decreasing in number, and kept this level extremely secret. Apart from
himself—the high priest—no one else was allowed on this floor. This
tactic was important for the new religious development as it stimulated
respect, curiosity and dependence. Society was told that it was on the
third floor that the high priest continuously met and talked with the gods.
Thus, anyone wanting to hear the word of god had to listen to the high
priest. He was the only authorized spokesperson of god. This tradition
was passed on to the Abrahamic religions. The prophet Moses spoke to
god at Mount Sinai where he received the Ten Commandments. Another
name of the prophet Jesus is “God’s Representative.” His attempts to
speak to god were thwarted by the devil but in the end he succeed. The
Prophet Mohammed’s ascension shows that the same tradition continues
in Islam. Whereas the top level would be adapted in the Abrahamic
religions as the synagogue, the church and the mosque, in Greco-Roman
religion it was re-arranged as the magnificent pantheon.

The high priest was not only the inventor, but also the presenter of new
ideas. His dialogues with the gods dictated the rearrangement of the new
society. For the first time, statues representing the gods are placed on the
third floor, further increasing people’s curiosity.* This practice resulted
from the need to symbolize the new conceptual god as idols and figures.
With humanity still under the influence of sign language, which is more
or less a figurative and body language, the contemporary human mind
was better able to understand figurative mental schemes than abstract
ones. Thus, it was easier to relate to figurative conceptualizations of god.

Thus, the Ziggurats’ top floor was the initial residence of god—the
pantheon, temple, church, mosque and university. These formations,
which are historically linked to one another, denote society’s sacred
memory and identity. Theology teaches this memory by philosophizing
about it, thereby dissociating and isolating it from the initial example.
The biggest distortions of history are made in the field of theology. No-

100

 
Urban Civilized Society

one can deny the importance of theology in the development of science
and philosophy but the social roots are never revealed. Because of the
sociality they constructed, the priest-class is the group bearing the biggest
responsibility for the formation of both the civilization of modernity and
of civilization in general.

Doubtlessly, theological interpretations that take their true origins
into consideration contribute much to our understanding. However, since
theologians are influential in all the official state and bureaucratic orders, it
is important that we are aware of the distortions—whether they are made
deliberately or unintentionally. In order to understand the Middle East of
today, I shall attempt to analyze the new forms of these distortions.

¢. Constructing society

The second mostimportant task of the priest was that of social engineer. He
not only planned and constructed the new society but also administered
it. This task was carried out on the Ziggurats’ second floor, the priests’
floor. At a later stage, a vastly increased number of priests developed into
a sacred class under the leadership of the high priest as the god’s deputies.
They, the elite administration of the city, formed the initial bureaucratic
caste. They housed the people on the first floor to facilitate the production
of the material goods—a first step into subsequent enslavement. But on
the second floor, they dealt with god and science. The foundations of
writing, mathematics, astronomy, medicine, literature and, of course,
theology were laid in the rooms of the priests on the second floor—the
initial school and university. The priests’ main task was to administer the
requirements of the growing urban society.

It should be understood that producers of material goods have never
done so of their own accord or indeed, as Marx puts it, production is
never done by “free laborerss” In no classed society, including that of the
capitalist period, do private or collective property owners have access
to free laborers. Nobody, unless enslaved through oppression and
legislation, works of his own accord for someone else’s benefit.

For the most part, the priests accomplished their tasks through
legitimation, which they obtained by selling themselves as the deputies
of god and by their monopoly on science. These positions gave them

101

.

 
Manifesto for a Democratic Civilization

extraordinary administrative powers. Let us not forget that even in the
capitalist era knowledge is power. The foundations of science were laid
during the Neolithic period, especially during the Tell Halaf period when
the contributions of the mother-woman-goddess were marked. Woman’s
position as the first teacher, especially with reference to the uses of various
plants, domestication of animals, pottery, weaving, grinding, housing
and creating sanctuaries, cannot be underestimated. The mother-goddess
Inanna in her struggle against Enki always claimed that she was thelegitimate
owner of the hundred and four Mes and that they were stolen from her by
Enki.* Many of the early discoveries were in fact made by women; the male
administrators did later steal this knowledge. As we will see, the Sumer
civilizational phase was indeed built on this stolen knowledge.

The contributions made by the priests cannot be underestimated.
Inscription, astronomy, mathematics, medicine and theology undeniably
played an enormous role in the scientific foundations of civilization. The
Sumerian priests played a leading part in the commencement of science.
The initial Sumerian kings, the priest-kings, were the first kings of urban
society. Every city had a priest-king. They received their legitimacy from
their scientific and theological inventions. However, these inventions
later constituted their main weakness. During the era of dynasties, “the
strong man” would lead the dynasties with his military force. Military
force would beat the priests at their game.

d. Establishing the workforce

At the lowest level of the Ziggurat were the workers. The first level workers
must be understood well because they laid the foundation for slavery,
serfdom and workforces. Where and how were they obtained? What
was the role of force and of persuasion? From which community and in
return for what were they obtained? Were there women amongst them?
What was the role of woman and family? Answers to these questions will
greatly enlighten us.

In the formation of the initial working groups, the priests’ power
of persuasion was probably the dominant factor. Furthermore, as food
production increased with the use of irrigation, we may assume that the
workers were fed better in the Ziggurat than they were in their places of

102

 
 

 

Urban Civilized Society

origin. As the population and migration increased, it is possible that some
fell into dispute with their tribe, eventually finding refuge in the temple.
The sacredness attributed to working in the temple could have played
an even more significant role. In Middle Eastern tradition, families and
tribes often gave their children to service at the temples—forced labor
at the temple brought honor to those who worked there: society exalts
them, as with Christian monasticism. Even today, to work for the sheikh
is not only honorable but a good deed.

Ziggurats are remarkable in that they are the first examples of pure
collective work. The workforce, including the craftsmen, is the first
example of the implementation of communist ideals. Sociologists such
as Max Weber have called it “Pharaoh Socialism.”¢ It is redolent of factory
production. The excess production is stored, thereby providing for times
of famine. This would enormously increase the priests’ power. None of
the families or tribes could obtain the same strength. The Ziggurat clearly
was the embryo of the new society and state.

e. Reconstructing the role of women and family

It is important to see what happened to the woman and family in the
Ziggurat system. The opposition of the mother-goddess religion to that of
the religion of the Ziggurat priest can be seen in the Sumerian texts. Each
city had a designated woman as guardian-goddess. In fact, the adventures
of Inanna, the Goddess of Uruk, provide an example worth studying as
Uruk was the first Sumerian city-state. (Could the name Iraq have Uruk
as its roots?) It is also a famous city since it was the city of the first male
king, Gilgamesh. It is highly probable that Uruk was the first city-state in
history and the period 3,800-3000 BCE is designated as the Uruk period.
The fact that the founder goddess of Uruk is Inanna shows that she is far
more ancient than Gilgamesh and that the role of the mother-woman was
still the leading one at the time. However, Uruks struggle against Eridu
(the city of the god Enki and perhaps the first priest-state) is legendary (an
excellent example of gender struggle). Over time, less and less figurines
of the woman-goddess were made and apparently, with the onset of the
Babylon period, the woman-goddess had been destroyed: Woman now
was an official public and private prostitute as well as a slave.”

103

%

 
Manifesto for a Democratic Civilization

In a designated section of the Ziggurat, woman played her role as love
object. At the time, this role seemingly was an honorary role preserved for
the daughters of the best families. Only the distinguished and privileged
girls were picked for this task. They received many lessons on beauty and
mastered some forms of art before, if they agreed to marry, they were
offered to the distinguished males of the surrounding regions. The result
was a dramatic increase in the income and influence of the temple. Only
the males from the noble families could obtain a woman from the temple.
The temple education would thus be represented in the new tribes; new
allegiances to the new society and new state were formed. In fact, women
were the most productive agents of the priests’ new society and state.
The collectivization of woman in this way is indeed the prototype of the
brothel. As woman’s position declined from being the noble goddess and
the temple’s woman of love, she turned into a desperate brothel worker,
putting herself on the market.

Sumerian society has the honor (or is it the dishonor?) of being the first
of its kind. However, had this method of schooling women not been abused
to the extent that it became a brothel system, it would have been the ideal
system due to the difficulty for girls to obtain a sound education in systems
where either the mother-woman or the father-man is dominant. But the
male dominant society, through the usage of oppression and exploitation,
toppled the original institution. The Sumerian training institution was the
envy of society—everyone wanted to give their daughters to the temple.
Initially the girls had the opportunity to develop themselves immensely;
their first goal was not to find a husband for themselves but to become the
leaders of the new society and state.

f. Organizing trade

Thus, the priests’ approach to women served the development of the new
society and state. The way the priests organized the new society and state
was close to ideal. Trade was still in the developing stage. Although there
is no evidence of this in the texts, we can assume that the Ziggurat also
functioned as a trading house. The surplus product and the production
of tools by the craftsman attached to the Ziggurats were probably the
objects of trade. History considers the period from 4,000 to 3,000 BCE

104

 
 

N

Urban Civilized Society

as the era that trade began. The era of the Sumerian society coincides
with the transition from the gift economy (parting of gifts amongst
the members of the society and families) to commodity (or exchange)
economy. Commodification during this era developed extensively,
resulting in production for exchange value. The Sumerian society can
thus be seen as the initial trade society.

The Uruk colonial system probably began between 3,500 and 3,000
BCE. Within the Taurus-Zagros system, the Uruk colonies were probably
the first colonization offensive of the new state structures. Although the
dynastic colonies were more ancient, these divergent tribal colonies
cannot be considered real colonies. A prerequisite to having colonies is to
be a metropolitan city. Uruk, as a very famous metropolis, must have had
many colonies. Later Ur (3,000-2,000 BCE) and Assyrian (2,000-1,750
BCE) colonies became very famous. The ancient cities of Harappa and
Moenjo-daro in the Punjab area, together with the Egyptian civilization,
were all, in a wider sense, colonial orders with roots in Sumerian
civilization since their roots also rested in the Tigris and Euphrates rivers.

One reason that trade played such an effective role in the priests’
system was that in the lower valleys of Mesopotamia many of the cities’
material needs were absent. Therefore, trade, expropriation, or both,
were a necessity. The colonial order developed exactly for the purpose of
obtaining material needs. Many of the colonies on the banks of the Tigris
and Euphrates were established due to this need. Especially widespread
were colonies needed for the timber, metal and weaving trades.

Thus, it is clear that a prototype of the new society and state was
formed within the Ziggurats. The concrete development of the state-
society that has influenced our system of civilization has the Sumerian
Ziggurat system as its origins. Indeed, the other examples, from Egypt to
China, follow the same path. To date, no counter-examples have come to
light to prove this thesis wrong,

So, from our analysis of the Ziggurats, we can conclude that the
beginning of the Sumerian society was also the beginning of the era
of masked gods and disguised kings. The initial masked gods were the
Sumerian priests but just behind them, with much fanfare and pomposity,
were the disguised (politically clothed) kings.

105
Manifesto for a Democratic Civilization

g. The emergence of dynasties

The priest-state society was a precursor to the dynastic system. For a
societal development such as state-based society to be successful, it
needed to be guaranteed first. Initially, intelligent people are needed to
make and legitimize the new arrangements. This cannot be accomplished
by political or military power—before coercion can be applied, there
needs to be a society and an administrative system that is conducive to
trade and surplus products. Only when this aspect of the new society is
well established can the seizure of power by political and military forces
be meaningful; if not, the attempt would bring nothing but chaos. In the
case of Sumer, this required the priests.

The dynastic system had a long and powerful history in Mesopotamia.
As ethnic identities developed and strengthened, dynasties emerged within
the clan and tribal order as those who had gained experience in protecting
the tribe, locating it in fertile regions and resolving its internal problems
gained prominence. Inevitably, one or more of these families or clans would
grow stronger than the others—either by taking part in the administration
of the tribe or by seizing it. Undoubtedly, the approval by the members of the
tribe would have been the decisive factor—strong kinship bonds amongst
them did not leave much room for strangers (unless an appropriate form
of participation and assimilation could be found). A strong clan identity
emerged during its formation stage. Such a development occurred around
5,000 BCE in Mesopotamia, but the Sumerian society was not the first to
undergo this development. A similar development had been experienced |
in the Semitic tribes between 9,000 and 6,000 BCE. Dynasties continued
to gain strength until around 5,000 BCE. During the Ubaid period, which |
likely preceded the Uruk period, there were strong dynasties, but there was
no transition to a state structure. However, there is evidence suggestinga
trend toward colonization when distinguished Semitic families settled in
the Aryan cultural stratum between 5,000-4,000 BCE. The initial Semitic
colonization took place at the Upper Tigris and Euphrates river basin,
today called South East Anatolia.

It is important to understand this particular aspect of dynasties, as
it still concerns us today: Familism and the desire to have as many male
children as possible constitute the cornerstone of the dynastic ideology.

106

 
Urban Civilized Society

Whereas the priest attains his leadership on the basis of his intellectual
power, the strong man of the dynasty attains leadership through political
power. Political power is associated with coercion. Whereas the power of
the priest is a cautionary, moral power—akin to the “curse of god”"—the
real source of political power is the military associates of the strong man.

In the period of the hunter-gatherers, when women were the dominant
influence, men had no power. To understand this, we have to understand
the matrilineal system and the notion of familism. In the matrilineal
system, the father is either unknown or insignificant. Women don't
choose the men fathering their children for love. They are not bound
to any man through housewifization. The male, on the other hand, is
not in a position to dominate a woman or to call her “his wife” If not
performed well, hunting is a job lacking esteem. The woman doesn’t seek
sexual intercourse for pleasure—sexuality is solely for the purpose of
reproduction. The children belong to her. By giving birth and nourishing
them, she attains this right. The notion of fatherhood rights at a period
when fatherhood has no social significance is non-existent. The woman’s
brothers have some significance because they grew up together. (The
custom of uncle-hood and aunt-hood—on the mother’s side—attains its
strength from this ancient woman’s law.) The matrilineal family consists
of the uncle, the aunt—and their children if they have any—and the
mother’s own children. This can be seen as the social expression of the
mother-goddess cult. Apart from the uncles, the males are insignificant;
the practice of fatherhood and husband-hood non-existent.

A dynastic system can only develop ideologically and in practice once
the matrilineal system has been inverted. A dynastic system—or patriarchal
system—roots itself in a society through an alliance of “the old man’s”
experience, “the strong mans” military associates and the legitimization
given by “the spiritual leader,—in the pre-priest period, the shaman.

The experiences of the old man signify lifelong lessons. He is the sage
that everyone consults and asks for advice. The community needs him.
And he in turn tries to overcome the difficulties of old age by making use
of his experiences. This is the pact he negotiates with society.

The strong man is the one desiring to escape the shackles of the
mother-woman through productive hunting. Physical strength and

107

 
Manifesto for a Democratic Civilization

superlative hunting techniques enhances his chances as a hunter. The
pact he establishes with the youngsters wishing to benefit from his skills
affords him even more success. The alliance established with the elderly
of the tribe strengthens patriarchy in the face of the matrilineal system.

The final link to the alliance is the shaman, who fulfills the functions
of the priest as well as the wizard. He is an educator and perhaps the
initial expert in the society. Although at times mixed with charlatanry, the
expertise of the shaman establishes itself in the society. Shamans are mostly
male. In the construction of the dynasties, their alliance with the strong men
strikes a huge blow to the matrilineal system. The Sumerian texts indicate
an intense struggle between the male alliance and their female antagonists.

In this new order, the male is both the owner of the children and the
acknowledged father. He wants to have many children, especially male
children, for work purposes and to acquire the accumulated possessions
that are held by the women. Thus, we witness the onset of ownership.
The private ownership of the dynastic system develops in parallel with
the collective ownership of the priest-state. For the inheritance to pass
on to the children (mostly the male children) fatherhood needs to be
constructed—another reason why there is a need to be acknowledged as
the father of the children.

Dynasties, patriarchy, and fatherhood are indicators that a classed
society is emerging, and indeed the Sumerian tablets speak of the kind of
struggle and political turmoil that indicate the emergence of such a society.

The Ur city-state system, which was constructed after the Uruk city-state,

had a dynastic character. In comparison to the theological administration
of the priests, the dynastic administration had a more secular and political
character. New gods were constructed and the priests were reduced
to deputies of the political leaders. They still played an important role,
but increasingly they lost their power and became mere propagandists
of the system. The masked gods, who gave birth to the state, became
progressively subordinate to the disguised king. The dynastic kings had
no hesitation in calling themselves god-kings, thereby making use of the
shield of legitimacy provided by the priests. Day by day the class divisions
intensified, the numbers of cities increased and, as a result, the Sumerian
civilization-type society proved its permanence and institutionalized itself.

108

 

 
T T T e T T T R n—

 

Urban Civilized Society

This ancient tradition of dynasties still prevails in the Middle East.
The reason why republics and democratic systems have not developed
in the Middle East is because the initial states were based on theocracies
and dynasties.

The model of the Sumerian civilized society has determined the
development of civilization in the Old World at least as much as the
Neolithic model. Civilization as a notion differs from that of culture because
of its connection with class division. Civilization is, in fact, all about a
class-culture and class-state. The dominant indicators of the new civilized
society are urbanism, trade, institutionalization of theology and science,
development of political and military structures, law taking prominence
over morality, and male gender discrimination. To a degree, the sum of all
these characteristics can be called “the culture of civilized society” Hence,
the two notions are often equated and given the same content.

The big expansion of the Neolithic society-culture of the Fertile
Crescent was followed by a second big expansion—that of civilized
society. It was the daughters of the mother-goddess that institutionalized
the Neolithic as they expanded into each region. Civilized society, which
is in reality male dominant culture, institutionalizes its sons wherever
they expand. The generation of the civilized male, who binds the female
child through housewifization, will always breed males; hence, the
masculinity of our civilization will continue to strengthen and multiply.

An Analysis of Civilized Society

Increasing our efforts to analyze the Sumerian society will enhance
our understanding of our own society. All that needs to be done is to
analyze civilization—to pull off the masks that cover its mentalities and
institutions so that the true faces and the actual status of the different
role-players within the society can be seen.

Our society tries to pass itself off as the youngest society, calling itself
‘contemporary” or “new age.” It claims that ancient civilization is old.
Ihis is peculiar—after all, adolescence is closer to birth than maturity.
If, as argued in the previous section, the Sumerian society represents
the birth of our own civilization, then the term “adolescence” should be

109
Manifesto for a Democratic Civilization

bestowed accordingly. If this is the case, then attributes such as “new”
and “young” are misnomers when they refer to our society. Rather, we
are the oldest society of this civilization. This misnaming indeed is a
continuation of the masking used by civilized (that is, the classed, city-
state) society.

The fundamental question that must be asked is: Why did civilized
society, which can also be called the “arban civilization,” require such
intense masking? The Sumerian priests’ art of masking was maintained
endlessly. While initially the concept of divinity had a meaningful and
noble content, why did it later become the foremost agent of degradation
and meaninglessness? Many opinions have been expressed in favor
of or against civilized society, but what has not been attained is the
formulation of a radical criticism of civilization and the development of
a set of guidelines to progress beyond it. This is indicative of the degree
to which all interpretations thus far have failed.

Still, it is widely accepted that there is an extraordinary suppression of
humanity’s desire for freedom—suppression so intense that the desire for
freedom has long ago reached a state of unsustainability. In fact, there is
not a single year in the history of civilization without wars. Living a life of
suppression has become “natural” Exploitation is seen as “the way of life,”
accepting it as honesty, and innocence and morals are deemed to be idiocy.

What is needed is an analysis of civilized society conducive to the
kind of criticism that will enable us to progress beyond this civilization.
A critique that focuses only on capitalist modernity will not lead to
such progress, as is quite clear from the failed efforts of many schools,
including the Marxists. The fundamental reason behind this failure is
the fact that civilized society, which capitalist modernity is bound to,
has not been included in the analyses. A Eurocentric philosophy of life
seems to have silenced even the fiercest opponents. Just as in our analysis
of the relationship between Neolithic culture and European civilization,
there is a dire need for a comprehensible analysis of the relationship
between European civilization and previous civilizations in terms of
history and society. The fact that I am convicted under the harshest
possible suppression of this civilization justifies my attempt at such an
interpretation despite its amateurishness.

110

 
Urban Civilized Society

a. In defense of a free life

The analysis of civilization is a matter for structural sociology. If the
main provision for being scientific is not to flounder in the swamp of
positivism but to obtain the knowledge and understanding that will
exceed the subject-object dichotomy, then there is a dire need for it in
structural sociology. The primary duty of general sociology is to diagnose
and treat society. There can only be one reason for knowing: to make some
sense of this life that we love. This in turn will give us the opportunity to
understand the structural issues and, if there are any unsound elements,
to restructure them.

The society of civilization is a structural heap, a conglomerate that
epistemology difficultly tries to make sense. The existence of this heap
is closely related to the distortion of our understanding. It is not enough
to just make an effective diagnosis; urgent treatment is necessary. If
our structural sociology and our sociology of freedom wish to evade
becoming a heap of rubbish like its predecessors, then it must prove its
strength in diagnosis and treatment.

Civilization is worse than just the “great slaughterhouse” Hegel called
it." It is a continuous genocide of freedom—which is the sole reason
for human life. All else is just the residue of life. Civilization is what
is left of life when the meaning of free life has been pumped out of it!
Is the history that we are taught not the chronicle of the construction
and collapse of states and their subsidiaries? Is acquiring power not the
sole aim of this? Which of the heroic tales are innocent of violence and
exploitation? Have those who claim to rebel for their tribe, nation, or
religion done anything but claim the crown of power? Does civilized
society, that has not had a year without war, deserve to be called anything
other than “the slaughterhouse”? Would the development of the sciences,
arts and technology that we hear so much about have been possible
Il it were not for the real inventors, either giving their lives for their
Inventions or having it seized from them? Can this reality that is told
a5 the story of order, stability and peace have any other meaning than
that of theatrical performances of how human beings are subjugated? We
can multiply the number of questions concerning civilization, but what is
really dreadful is the boldness and arrogance with which this story is told

1

 
Manifesto for a Democratic Civilization

as the undeniable fate of humanity, as a story of friendship, genteelness
and alliance, a glorious history, sacred religion, legend of love and beauty,
magnificent inventions, the dream of reaching for heaven.

My purpose in raising so many questions lies in my interest in, respect
for, and devotion to the last unspoken words of all those who took up
resistance in the name of freedom. It may just be that a meaningful
method will empower us to fight in defense of a life of freedom.

b. The role of class struggle in civilized society

It is important to have a clear understanding of the notion of class as used
by the opponents of capitalist modernity. If not, opposition will never go
beyond demagogy; a vague and hazy understanding will serve only as a
tool to keep the essence of capitalist modernity disguised. What we need
to determine, is whether class has any role to play on its own, whether it
has the ability to act as subject—as an agent determining action.

Class constitutes the hands and feet of power. As with hands and feet,
on its own class has no power. But the power within modern society—
and the Leviathan within civilized society—is the most organized power
there is. We can describe the state as the unity of the power relations
through which the general coercion and exploitation of classed society
is enabled. Does this not entail that those coerced and exploited are
an inseparable part of this network of relations? Is it not true that
civilization—that is, organizational and structuring power—lies not only
in the organization of the state, that it can also be found in fields such
as religion and the economy? Is it not the main function of this power
to create the slave, serf, worker and the numerous other horizontal and
vertical strata of society?

In the organization of power, the hands and feet will never be given
the opportunity of being “subject”—the agent determining the action. If
power relations have been successfully installed, an absolute domination
over the laborers has been achieved. This means that, even if the laborers
previously did have acting power, under these circumstances they would
lose it. This is exactly why the slave-laborer rebels of the Spartacus era and
Paris Commune never had a chance to succeed. Only on one condition
would success have been possible: if the powers of the time had seen them

112

 
Manifesto for a Democratic Civilization

overthrown were overthrown together with their subjects and proletariat.
In the few cases where they were overthrown by their subjects and
proletariat, the new administration has usually been far worse than the
previous oppressive and exploitative regime.

While asserting that class is fundamental to civilization, at the same
time we have to acknowledge that to view history as nothing but a series
of class struggles is a highly reductionist approach. The maintaining
of civilization, and hence the history of civilization, is indeed based
on oppression and exploitation, but the ideology, policy and even the
economy of this system works on a different basis. In other words, the
course of history has not been determined purely by a struggle of class
versus class. With this statement, I am not negating the dreadfulness of
enslavement, the degrading characteristics of the system or its denial of
freedom. My contention is that the struggle between classes could not
have been the sole cause of the establishment and collapse of systems of
political power and the various systems of civilization. My interpretation
is that opposition to the system always ends in becoming part of it—
either by knowingly joining the existing political power or system of
civilization as a new political force or, despite rejecting it, by not being
able to escape being the “new blood” for the system, as happened in the
Soviet and Chinese experiences.

This approach may be criticized as being lenient toward power
reductionism and of not pointing a way out. I will discuss this issue in detail
in my forthcoming book, The Sociology of Freedom. For the time being, let
me just say that freedom has its own social area, mentality and strategy, just
as political power has its own ideology, policies and organization.

¢. The role of conflict in civilized society

Although the question under discussion is that of conflict or
alliance between civilizations, its historical meaning is much more
comprehensive. Civilized society is a structure that generates conflict
both within and between civilizations. To achieve the aim for which this
society was generated and to institute the class division that it bases itself
upon, requires oppression and exploitation combined with continuous
diversion and disguise. This explains the need to continuously generate

14

 
 

Urban Civilized Society

conflict. Political power and class division by their very nature mean
conflict, whether internally or externally. It does not matter how we
categorize a civilization in an attempt to hide its essence. Whether
warlike or pacifist, monotheist or polytheist, fertile or infertile, cultured
or ignorant, from the same tribe or from different tribes—these attributes
do not change the essence of civilized society. Its guiding force is its
perceived duty to conquer the whole world. The desire to become a world
power is a structural disease. Its source is political power. The moment
it stops expanding, it starts to regress—it does not end up as a “normal”
power but ends up in collapse. Like cancer, it must either eradicate or
be eradicated. There have been many simple tribal chiefs who deified
themselves with the powers of civilization.

Behind the assertion of divinity lies the power to destroy humanity.
Mass destruction creates the belief that mass creation is possible; an
uncontrolled ego develops into limitless megalomania. The civilization
system offers a society in which this disease can flourish. It has been
said that there is not a single social value and personality that political
power cannot corrupt—truly an insight into the essence of political
power. Civilizations are societies of political power and hence systems in
constant conflict with life. There is not a single value that one would not
sacrifice in order to attain political power, nor one’s own brother, partner
or friend. An in-depth examination of the administration of civilizations

will make evident the many murders and conspiracies. Indeed, the
systematized lies are called “politics.”

d. Subservience of society as a whole

Attention should be drawn to a characteristic that has become
Institutionalized in civilized society, namely the susceptibility of society
(o political power. It happened in a way quite similar to the remaking of
women according to the institution of housewifization. Political power
cannot be sure of its continued existence before it has recreated society,
just as it did with women. Housewifization, as the most ancient form of
enslavement, has been institutionalized as result of woman's defeat by
the strong man and his attendants. It required a long and comprehensive
war andéresulted in the domination of the sexist society. This action of

15
Manifesto for a Democratic Civilization

domination has positioned itself within the society before the civilization
was fully developed. This was such an intense and fierce struggle that
it has been erased from our memories, together with the consequences
thereof. Woman cannot remember what was lost, where it was lost and
how it was lost. She considers a submissive womanhood as her natural
state. This is why no other enslavement has been legitimized through
internalization as much as woman’s enslavement.

This had a twofold, devastating effect on society. Firstly, it paved the way
for society to be enslaved; secondly, thereafter, all enslavement was based
on housewifization. Housewifization is not just about becoming a mere
object of sexism. It is not a biological characteristic either. In its essence,
housewifization is a social characteristic. Enslavement, submission,
acceptance of insults, crying, the habit of lying, being unassertive, self-
sacrifice and the like are all considered a part of housewifization. These
characteristics also indicate a rejection of the ethics of freedom.

This aspect constitutes the social grounds for degradation. In fact, it is
the true reason for enslavement. It is the institutionalized grounds that have
given breathing space to all forms of enslavement, from the most ancient
forms to the most modern. In order for the system of civilized society to
function, society as a whole must be made to adopt wife-like characteristics.
If political power is identical to masculinity, then the housewifization of |
the society is inevitable. Political power doesn't recognize the principles of 4
freedom and equality because—should it do so—it could not exist. There
are essential similarities between political power and sexist society.

In ancient Greece, which is considered to be a milestone of our
civilization, male teenagers were offered to the experienced men as “boys.”
The philosopher Socrates maintained that the contact between erastes (the
adult male) and eromenos (the youth) could be aimed not only at sexual
love, but also at obtaining moral wisdom and strength—in other words, to
prepare the boy for a code of behavior “befitting” to women. Greek society
quite openly wished to create a housewifized society. As long as there still
were noble and dignified youths, such a society wouldn’t be possible, hence
housewifized behavior had to be internalized. Eromenoi were widespread
in this society: it reached a point where it was customary for every master
to have a “boy” Thus, we can't view this custom as sexual perversion or a

116

 
Urban Civilized Society

disease; in fact, it was a social phenomenon caused by the classed society.
In all different shapes of civilized societies similar trends exist. In other
words, the grounds for power relations within civilized societies have been
carefully prepared and on the basis of housewifization. The tradition of
civilization sees women as “men’s field” A similar view exists with regard
to society. Men must offer themselves to political power as women offer
themselves to men. Those that rebel or refuse to offer themselves will be
readied through warfare.

The creation of power systems is not sudden, nor are they created by
any individual, class, or nation. Governments may be formed suddenly,
but political power and political systems have been prepared as a culture
of domination by hundreds of brutal emperors and various other
dominating forces. Societies—just as the wife waits for her husband as
if it was her destiny—wait to be used by their political powers. Political
power exists as a dominant culture within society. Therein lies the true
importance of the quote attributed to Mikhail Bakunin, “If you took the
most ardent revolutionary, vested him in absolute power, within a year he
would be worse than the Tsar himself?”

This degeneration is elicited by the power system. The seat of power,
composed of the blood and exploitation of thousands of years, will of
necessity corrupt the one sitting on it. There is only one way of not
getting corrupted: by being devoted to protecting oneself! One of the
most striking examples of the corruptive force of power can be found
in the experience of real socialism. One cannot doubt their intentions
or their devotion to their aims; why then did, did those who set up the
system voluntarily gave themselves up to capitalism—the very system
that they fought so hard against? In my opinion, the fundamental reason
lor this historical tragedy is the way in which power was obtained and
exercised. The founders of socialism came to power through the culture
of civilized society. Although they claimed to oppose this bloody and
exploitative heritage and claimed that they refused to become a power
resting upon it, they fully embraced it. Kropotkin's criticism against
Lenin for the quick transition from soviets to the adaptation of state
power was even seen as opportunism.'” Immanuel Wallerstein comes
close to the truth when stating that the Soviets did not have the inherent

17

 
Manifesto for a Democratic Civilization

strength to surpass the capitalist world-system and thus were destroyed
by the impact of that world-system. But this is still not the essence of the
problem. Michel Foucault, with the insight that the soviets reintegrated
with the system because they used the systems method of handling
knowledge and power, is much closer to the truth.

The same happened with the Paris Commune, numerous national
liberation movements, and initiatives by both communists and social
democrats. Just as each field is sown with only one crop, freedom and
socialism cannot be generated in the millennia old fields of knowledge
and power. To succeed, activists and theorists of freedom and socialism
must prepare their own fields, continuously diagnosing and treating
contagious diseases that are generated by power relations and, even
more importantly, keeping a distance from power relations and all
its institutions and characteristics. If rich democratic forms are not
implanted and nurtured at the same time, they will not escape the
power net and only repeat the thousands of failed attempts which,
in the end, were not at all different from the systems of power they
sought to escape. Keeping in mind the limited understanding of the
human being, claiming that we understand the whole universe would
be arrogant. Therefore, to attribute to divinity the things that cannot be
explained with the humans’ limited knowledge and information must
be seen as “good” metaphysics.

e. Religion, science, philosophy, the arts, morality and law in civilized society

It is important to understand the role that such institutional practices as
religion, science, philosophy; the arts and morality play in civilized society.

The bedrock of religion lies in the extraordinary value attached to
food. During the Neolithic, the attainment of abundant and diverse
types of food was gratefully received as a blessing from a divine entity
that humans equated with their own social identity. Even today we do
not understand the reason behind life; during the Neolithic an effort '
was made to attach a meaning to it through the concept of divinity, a |
concept which is in fact closer to a creative principle than to magic and |
enchantment. It is important that we don't confuse this idea of divinity |
with Allah. The concept of Allah was constructed in the atmosphere of

18

 
Urban Civilized Society

the Semitic culture; as illustrated below, it had a different and particular
course of development.

Attaching moral aspects to the gods they manufactured eased the
Sumerian priests’ task of selling themselves to the society that they had
constructed. The priests were probably the first to attribute punishment
and sin to the notion of god in order to develop the sense of obedience.
God was slowly turned into the state. This is the reform brought about by
the Sumerian priests. From many of the wall reliefs it is clear that much
was done to increase the status of the state’s administrators, and thus to
increase the administration’s authority over society. The king managed
to mask his own interests very well as he went to war in the name of his
god. In all the drawings and narratives from Sumér the administrator is
always the beloved son of the god; its enemies are the devil that must be
conquered. Slowly a group of gods took shape—a clear reflection of the
new administration.

The indistinguishability of god and administrator has never been
displayed so openly in any other society. The question of who was
masking whom no longer held much importance. The more god was
turned into the state, the more he attained attributes such as “supreme
creator;’ and as the priests developed into the administrative class
attributes such as “administrator” were assigned to god as well. In
time god and administrator became equated; distinguishing between
them impossible. This is the point where the constructed divinity
turned into bad metaphysics. In all the later stages all civilized societies
would discover and use the magical power of religion and god in the
legitimization of administration. Although the god of old—the sacred
and creative divine force—would occupy a place in the thoughts and
emotions of the oppressed, the god and religion that would become the
state played their roles through their administrative agents.

There is a notable relationship between the number of gods and the
form of a society. Polytheism occurs during an era of tribal equality. The
decrease in number and the ranking of the gods according to supremacy
s closely related to the administrative protocol. The gradual rise to
A primary god is a development in line with the distinction between
the administrators, We need to investigate the relationship between

119

 
Manifesto for a Democratic Civilization

the invisible god of monotheist religions, who may not be represented
in images, and the state that no longer depends on individuals and no
longer has a need to institutionalize itself.

The gradual decrease in the number of gods amidst the
administrative forces means on the one hand their unmasking; on the
other hand, it clarifies what the state really entails and whose interests
it represents. This decrease signifies that religion was no longer needed
for legitimization. Nevertheless, civilized society has always used the
legitimization effect of religion as much as it has used tyranny. Turning
religion into state and its privatizations is part and parcel of civilized
society, specifically of the development in its administration. This
explains the formation of different religious orders and of religious
conflicts. Contending civilizations are contending religions and sects.
The battles are taken up in the name of religions and sects so that the
whole society can be drawn in. The big and long civilization battles
have always been disguised as religious battles. The wars waged in the
name of Islam, Christianity and Judaism were in essence struggles for
dominance over the Middle Eastern civilization, as became apparent
when they were later declared official state ideologies. But, as with any
phenomenon that reaches its peak, their importance has decreased.
As well as reflecting class conflict, dissident sectarianism has always
signified the rebellious attitude of the marginal societies excluded from
civilized society. During the construction of capitalist nation-states, -
sectarianism was transformed into a type of nationalism—a pretext -
masking the real reason behind the bloody wars.

Although the significance of philosophy is small compared to that
of religion, it is still highly important. The inadequacy of religious
explanations for the phenomenon of life makes apparent the need for
philosophy. Sagacity, which has a history as old as religion, can be seen
as the beginning of philosophy. The sage, who represents the thinking
human, is a different source of understanding than the theologian. The
opinions of the sage were valued as highly as those of god’s spokesman.
They were never at peace with the state or civilization, having been more
devoted to the part of society that falls outside the boundaries of official
society. They have played a distinct role in the development of morals and

120

 
Urban Civilized Society

science. Strong traces of the wisdom associated with the mother-goddess
survived in the Sumerian society. The rise of the prophets certainly had a
lot do with such wisdom. The tradition of wisdom and philosophy in the
Middle East certainly warrants more research.

Just as the Sumerian priests were able to conduct the construction of
religion and god in parallel with state and society, the Greek philosophers
helped to construct and perpetuate a new, more developed civilized
society partly by means of both religion and philosophy. The method
the two groups used is the same, namely the artful use of concepts.
Whereas in Sumer, state and society resulted from concepts used for the
construction of religion, in Greece state and society were given shape
through philosophic concepts. The masked gods had begun to give way
to unmasked gods and naked kings. Development in the thinking of
humanity is related to development in philosophy.

Philosophical thought, which played a relatively limited role in
Greco-Roman society, underwent a dramatic revolution in capitalist
European society. Here, the turmoil in religion was reflected in
philosophy. The biggest contributor to this turmoil was the emphasis
on national and class interests to meet the requirements of the system.
When conflicts were not resolved through religious wars the duty fell
on the shoulders of philosophy. The last religious wars were fought
between 1618 and 1649. The 17th century was the very same century of
philosophical revolution. Philosophy became the leading ideology in
the new civilized society, as can be witnessed from the rise of the many
philosophic schools at the time. While on the one hand the “death of
god” is declared, on the other hand, disguised kings are dethroned. This
marked the beginning of the period of nation-states—which themselves
have become divine—and capitalist states—which are nothing but
naked kings.

The Neolithic agricultural revolution also led to a revolution in arts,
Cave drawings were followed by mother-goddess figures, the forerunners
of sculpture. With the onset of civilized society, the figures of god and
administrators were drawn alongside each other. Increased class division
and administrative authority gave rise to the nationalization of the arts
as much as religion did. Especially in the art of Egypt, China and India,

121

 
Manifesto for a Democratic Civilization

gods, kings and priests competed in a show of strength as symbolized
through enormous statues and reliefs. Architecture followed the same
path in the houses of religion and administration. Temples and palaces
of vast dimensions were constructed. Huge tombs were built—horrible
indications of the level that human exploitations and repression can reach
in civilized society. For the construction of a pyramid or a temple alone
thousands of people were sacrificed. As trade increased, the merchant
became a frequent figure in art. Often other powerful figures besides
kings were honored with monuments.

The rise of Greco-Roman civilization brought a revolution in urban
architecture. Cities, previously consisting only of the inner and outer
periphery of the castles, went through structural transformations which
evoke admiration even today. The underlying labor cost, to a large extent,
was the enslavement of society. Most of the slave labor was used for the
urban building projects. The indicators of enslavement are the enormous
tombs, temples, castles and cities. These structures are also indicative of
the lives and labor that civilized society required. With their sculptures,
attempting to immortalize beauty and superiority, Greco-Roman society
reached new heights in the world of the arts.

Greco-Roman art and culture, revived during the Renaissance, was
the inspirational power of European civilization. Feudal Europe, ruled by
religion, could only free itself intellectually through Renaissance culture,
which was partially open to free thinking. Only with the development of
the bourgeoisie, the new civilized class, would the arts effectively influence
large numbers. Yet popular art has never reached the magnificence of the
past. Art forms, such as urban architecture, music, painting and sculpture,
have degenerated in the hands of capitalism, losing their sacredness and
distinct identity by turning into an arts industry and thereby declaring
their own death.

Oral legends tell with great eloquence of the sacredness of the
initial tribal identity and the yearning for it. These legends are the main
resources of the written legends. The Epic of Gilgamesh, the first written
text of substantial length in history, may be the main source for not
only literature but also for the sacred texts. The Sumerian literature and
religious texts were inspirational not only for the Greek literature and

122

 
Urban Civilized Society

theology—Greek legends (especially all the mythological constructions)
were the transformed versions of the Sumerian legends that travelled
throughout Anatolia.

Although the distinction between good and evil in the myths and
legends is also linked to the fundamental social division within civilized
society, in essence it defines the distinction between good and evil within
society. Its essence is socialist: good morality is equated with devotion
to society, whereas remoteness from and conflict with society denotes
evil. Social constructions always have had a moral character. The initial
“constitution” of society was its moral rules. Morality lies at the heart
of society—a society that loses its moral basis cannot but disintegrate.
Adherence to the rules of the government is considered a sacred duty;
social rules can be seen as devotion to the social identity, divine existence,
language and other aspects of society. This devotion may include having
to risk one’s life. Being excluded from society is equal to a death sentence.

Law is an important invention of civilized society. It only came
into existence with the development of social and class divisions and
nationalization. Its origin is in the morals of society. In the same way
that nationalization of religious sacredness led to state religion, the
nationalization of morality led to law. The law denoted the governing
rules of the new sate-society and the interests, property and security of
the ruling class and in effect was the constitution of the new society.

The earliest sets of laws we know of come from the Sumerian society.
Pre-dating the well-known Code of Hammurabi by three centuries,
there is the Code of Ur-Nammu (written about 2100 BCE). Though the
birthplace of law is, therefore, not Rome or Athens but the Sumerian
city-state, much emphasis has been placed on the link between law,
the republic and democracy during the Athenian and Roman eras.
The birth of the republic and democracy necessitated a code of official,
written laws—a constitution—to ensure a collective administration by
an aristocracy, preventing the establishment of monarchies and despots.
Although precursors existed in the Sumerian society, the first republican
system emerged in Rome and the first democracy arose in Athens.
In the civilization of the European bourgeoisie, constitutionalism,
republicanism and democracy have been some of the most important

123

 
Manifesto for a Democratic Civilization

issues concerning law. The latest development concerns human rights.
With this development, individualism and representation are carried
to the social level. Thus, the pendulum has now swung to the opposite |
of where it was during the Neolithic, when morality demanded the
individual’s devotion to society.

History recognizes three major revolutions pertaining to scientific
development. First, there was the institutionalization period of the Neolithic
(6,000-4,000 BCE, i.e. the Tell Halaf period) and the contribution of -
Sumerian society. Next was the period of the West Anatolian-Athens society
(600 to 300 BCE). We are currently in the third period, that of the Western
European society (commencing in the sixteenth century). The connection
between these revolutions and the stages of civilization is obvious—each
stage of civilization was built upon its own scientific revolution.

Scientific development cannot be separated from the other categories '
of the interpretation of knowledge discussed above (that is, religion,
philosophy, literature, arts, morality and law). Science’s only “privilege”
is that it deals with the part of knowledge that is empirically verifiable.”
Science does not contain all knowledge—only the knowledge that pertains
to empirically verifiable phenomena. In a broader sense, there is no
knowledge that cannot be empirically verified. The division of knowledge
into categories (such as verifiable or unverifiable, positivist or metaphysical,
theoretical or empirical) has been created by civilized society, and has
much to do with the relationship between knowledge and power.

As a whole, the relationship between civilized society and these
categories of knowledge can be expressed as the conflict between meaning
or interpretation of knowledge and power. These disciplines resulted from
the experience of human society. But, since that section of civilized society
that represents the state came into being, the practical manifestations of
this experience and the development of the human mentality that led to
it in the first place have been distorted and expropriated. One of the first
things that the administrators have always done with the onset of a new
stage in civilization is to reorganize the categories according to their own
social paradigm and the source of their practical power. Each stage of the
civilization is arranged on the basis of a new, fundamental paradigm. All
this rearranging is a means of disguising, of obscuring and of enchaining

124

 
Urban Civilized Society

those who are ruled. The legitimation that the new paradigms allow for
has always been preferred to undisguised tyrannical administration. The
administrators’ main endeavor with this rearranging has always been to
present their interest as the interest (and even the destiny) of society as
a whole. The more successfully they do this, the more they can prolong
the lifespan of the so-called civilized societies. No civilization—even
a world civilization—that loses its legitimacy can escape collapse. The
collapse of the Roman civilization is an example of this. It lost respect
and appeal because of the growing Christian community internally,
and the migration of other ethnic communities externally. When these
communities united as new religious and ethnic communities, the
extraordinary Roman power lost its legitimacy and fell apart. All major
civilizations have been religious civilizations. But when religion loses its
ability to provide legitimacy (whether through philosophy, science or a
new religion) this usually means the end of that civilization.

All of these facts show the critical importance of the major categories of
interpretation (religion, philosophy, arts, law, science and morality) for the
civilized (that is the classed, city-state) society. While the task of structural
sociology is to explain these categories within the civilized society, the task
of the sociology of freedom is to interpret how these categories should be
criticized and then combined with a free and democratic social life.

If studied in isolation, investigating the social institutions—which
can also be seen as metaphysical categories—leads to the distortion of
meaning. But metaphysical disciplines, which are so harshly and fiercely
criticized, cannot be evaluated as “good” or “bad” per se. Since the
human mind and human society cannot make do without metaphysics,
Il is more meaningful to make methodological evaluations of good and
bad metaphysics in relation to one another and the society in question.

f. The role of economics in civilized society

Historically, studies of economics are both complicated and open to
distortion. Capitalist civilization has made economy a field of theoretical
and empirical research. Economics is indeed research of the “material”
ol the social reality. Capitalist civilization, which has recorded itself in
history as the material civilization, can also be called the “economic

125

 
Manifesto for a Democratic Civilization

system.”? In the same way that we can call all of the previous systems of
civilization “metaphysical systems,” calling capitalism “materialist” may
have explanatory value.

All societies, from the Neolithic society (or even the initial hominid
societies) to the pre-capitalist civilized societies, have appraised sacredness,
meaningfulness and, on the whole, metaphysics itself and have not able to
interpret life in any other way. Capitalist civilization, on the other hand,
has presented itself as “unmasked gods and naked kings” (a development
so profound that it warrants exhaustive studies into its importance and
extent). Ironically, this is the society with the highest power to obstruct,
mislead and dissolve within itself (that is, to assimilate).

My personal opinion is that seizure and theft, organized in the name
of “economy,” constitute the essence of its social form. The Greek word
oikonomia means “household management.” It denotes the material rules
of subsistence, its periphery, supplies and other materials. If we extrapolate
this to civilized society, it denotes the subsistence rules of smaller
communities. This constitutes the least nationalized and privatized
social reality. It is the fundamental tissue of social collectivism, its
privatization and nationalization are inconceivable because privatization
and nationalization of the oikonomia would devastate this fundamental
social tissue. It is to deny society its most critical rule of life. Therefore,
no other society but capitalism perceived the idea and had the courage
to make privatization and nationalization the leading characteristics of
society. There is no doubt that all social areas in civilized society have
been nationalized and the economy—its most fundamental tissue—has
been the subject of both private and state ownership. No other society
but capitalism has ever officially and openly declared private and state
ownership as its system.

It is important to note that the privatization and nationalization of the
economy has been seen as seizure and theft from very early on. Karl Marx
expresses this in a more scientific way when he says that the surplus value
is stolen as profit. This is an issue that needs to be analyzed exhaustively.
We can interpret economy—which has become the subject of private and
state ownership—to be a seizure and theft beyond that of the surplus
value (or surplus product before that). Hence, all the different types of

126

 
Urban Civilized Society

ownership of the economy, including private and state ownership, are
immoral and can be seen as seizure and theft. I will deal with this issue in
more detail in the section on capitalism.

Commodification has developed as a very important notion
within civilized society. There is a close-knit connection between
commodification and the civilized society—be it the society of private
ownership, classed society or the city-state. Seeing that commodity and
commodification are the prime indicators of attaining the state of being
civilized, we have to clarify the term “commodity” An object becomes a
commodity when it gains an exchange value that is not determined by
the satisfaction of a human need. The idea of exchange value was foreign
to society for a long time—it was not even entertained as a thought
because it was considered a shame: precious objects were made gifts
to society or to a valued individual. Replacing the gift system with the
exchange system is the invention—or rather deception—of civilization.
For pre-civilized society and the societies that have remained outside
civilization, exchange has been shameful and should be refrained from
unless absolutely necessary. Such societies have known from experience
that when the economy overproduces and its production becomes an
object of exchange, grave trouble might be in the offing.

As commodities acquired exchange value, merchants and trade have
become important categories of civilization. Here I have to note that I
do not share Karl Marx’s concept of commodity. The opinion that the
exchange value of a commodity can be measured by the workers’ labor
has initiated a conceptualization period fraught with disadvantages. This
may be better understood if we look at the disintegration of a society
which has no value that has not yet been commodified. The mental
acceptance of the society’s commodification is to abandon being human.
And this is beyond barbarity. Beneath the societal harm sits the interest
rate, of which trade is the basis and of which, in turn, the commodity
Is the basis. There is a strong causal link between trade and ecological
disaster. When the economy stopped being social tissue it marked the
beginning of a fundamental break with nature. This happened because
of the profound distinction that was made between material and moral
values, which form a natural unity. In a way, this severance cultivated

127

 
Manifesto for a Democratic Civilization

the seeds of bad metaphysics. By leaving the material without spirit
and the spiritual without matter, the path was being paved for the most
confusing dichotomy encountered in the history of thought. Throughout
the history of civilization, the bogus distinctions and discussions that
have divided every aspect of life into either materialism or morality have
destroyed ecology and free life. The concept of inanimate matter and an
inanimate universe, combined with an incomprehensible spiritualism,
are occupying, invading, and colonizing the human mind.

I have some doubts about another aspect of Marx’s concept. I am
quite doubtful that social values (including commodities) are measurable.
Commodities cannot be regarded as a mere product of abstract labor but,
rather, as a combination of many non-quantifiable, non-natural properties.
To claim the opposite paves the way for fallacy, extortion and theft. The
reason is clear: How are we to measure the total amount of non-countable
labor? Moreover, how are we to measure the labor of a mother at birth and
that of the family that raises the worker? Then, how are we to measure the
share of the whole society in which this object called “value” is realized?
Hence, exchange value, surplus value, labor-value, interest rate, profit,
unearned income and so forth are all forms of theft through official and
state power. It may be meaningful to develop other measures or new forms
of a gift economy to replace the exchange system. I will delve deeper into |
this topic later when I discuss modernity and free life.

Even in Greek culture trade was a despised occupation—the Greeks
were aware of the connection between trade and theft. Nor was the position
of the merchant in Roman society considered honorable. Commodification
pertained only to a limited number of objects; serious precautions were
implemented to restrict it. In other words, the morality of Neolithic society
still existed as far as commerce was concerned. Although, due to favorable
circumstances, there were occurrences of capitalism before it became the |
dominant system, even the civilized societies did not allow it to flourish. It
was always kept at a marginal level. The fact that it flourished in the 16th -
century in what is today the Netherlands and England resulted from very
special circumstances. It is entirely possible that the capitalist system was
a necessity for the existence of the Netherlands and England. Within 400
years it had spread around the world.

128

 
Urban Civilized Society

My aim with this very short introduction to civilization was to
provide the historical and sociological background needed to develop a
meaningful method of interpreting knowledge. Our respect for free life
demands that all of us who believe that we have a social duty should work
from a historical and sociological perspective, so that we can arrive at a
meaningful interpretation. In order for us not to be deceived and not to
deceive anyone else, a profound analysis of civilization in general—but
especially of capitalist civilization—must be combined with the sociology
of freedom so that free life can be constructed.

Problems Associated with the Expansion of Civilized Society

There is general agreement in the scientific discussion of our key question:
when and where did the world’s current dominant civilization develop? The
location of this development was in the Upper and Lower basins of the
Tigris and Euphrates rivers. And, indeed, my analysis in the previous two
sections indicates that the mountain basin skirting the Upper Tigris and
Euphrates is the root of civilization—the ovule. The fertilization of the
ovule by the Sumerian priests led to the foundation of civilized society.
The process that I have described in one sentence, however, took place
over thousands of years of trial and error.

As there is not a single event, notion, institution, action, personality
or society that does not bear the effects of time and location, a method
of investigation that takes these two factors into account will necessarily
add to a meaningful result. Thus, in agreement with Fernand Braudel, I
hold that it is essential for the establishment of a meaningful sociology
that the concept of term—or duration—forms a fundamental part of the
methodology. But I want to go further than Braudel and propose that
location should also be included. (It remains a puzzle to me why Western
scientists generally ignore the factors of location and time. Could it be a
result of a Eurocentric approach or a tendency to universalize Europe?)
A methodology of sociological investigation that includes history and
location will reveal not only what we have been and what we are now; it
will also reveal how life could proceed. If past and present are within reach
of one another, and if locations complement one another like the steps of a

129

 
Manifesto for a Democratic Civilization

staircase, then it follows that humanity is a whole and it can live up to this
unity without the need for ethnicity, religions, nations, states, alliances, and
international bodies like the UN and Socialist Internationals.

These introductory notes indicate the approach I will follow in my
analysis of civilization's expansion over location and time.

a. Problems with the expansion of the Sumerian and Egyptian civilizations

As previously stated, the Neolithic institutionalization was the ovule out
of which civilization grew. Without this ovule, the Sumerian fertilization
would have been meaningless; there was no other ovule from which it
could have sprouted. Just as we can't think of the United States without
the existence of Europe, one can't think of the Lower Tigris and
Euphrates becoming what it is without the existence of the Upper Tigris
and Euphrates civilization.

An important question regarding expansion is why were advanced
settlements in the Middle Tigris and Euphrates region, and even in
Anatolia, unable to make the transition to urbanization. Looking back
5,000 years, we see that there were many regions that nearly reached
the civilization stage and many big villages that entered into the stage
of urbanization. However, for reasons still unclear, they collapsed before
making the transition to a more advanced level. Examples of this are
Catalhoyiik in southern Anatolia and the excavated villages in the border
region between Iran and Turkmenistan."

Urbanization will occur only in the presence of a sizeable and
permanent population. Populations expand drastically only when
there is a surplus in food production. Oversupplies of food occur only
where there is artificial irrigation of the alluvial earth at river mouths,
as in the alluvial region around the Nile and the Tigris-Euphrates rivers. -
Besides the preconditions of population size and permanence, certain

cultural factors must be present in the surrounding regions. No single
alluvial region could have formed the Neolithic culture because the pre-
conditions were not all met. On the other hand, notall the pre-conditions
needed for urbanization existed in the Neolithic culture.
At around 3,500 BCE, the Uruk urban civilization developed at the
lower end of the basin. It established a colonial order and developed

130

 
Urban Civilized Society

a system that multiplied the number of cities under its domain. It has
the honor of being the first civilization in history. It collapsed around
3,000 BCE—likely due to the rivalry of systems with more fertile and
numerous cities—but the survival of the cult of the goddess Inanna and
the Gilgamesh legend attest to the immortality of the culture.

The dynastic period of Ur began at about 3,000 BCE. It continued
to exist in the form of three dynasties until it collapsed at around 2,000
BCE. The first written law codes, literary epics, academies, conflicts
between cities just as ruthless as those of today (striking examples of this
are found in epics such as the Nippur Lament and the Curse of Akkad),
are just a few things that come to mind about this period. It seems that
Ur had an extensive colonial system. In fact, many of the early colonies
in the Zagros-Taurus arch were theirs, but they ceased to exist just as
quickly as they developed. One may conclude that this was due to the
cultural strength of the society within which they formed their colonies.

The age of Babylon began at around 2,000 BCE. Although it adopted the
written Akkadian language for official use, Sumerian was retained as sacred
language. In essence, Babylon formed part of the Sumerian civilization and
Babylon, especially with regards to science and institutionalization, can be
seen as the apogee of the Sumerian civilization. The city of Babylon can
be likened to the European city of Paris. It was a city of science, culture
and commerce; cultures from all over converged there, and there, for the
first time, cosmopolitanism occurred. The age of the Nimrods (the initial
strong kings) started in Babylon. Keeping in mind that many of the Greek
philosophers (including Solon) took their first schooling in Babylon, will
help us appreciate that its influence spread like a chain reaction. The Enuma
Elish myth, depicting the sorrowful story of women's plight, is renowned
for its description of the struggle between the god Marduk and the goddess
Tiamat. Its astronomy;, its sages’ prophecies, its captivity of the Israelites, its
huge written literature and its resistance to the Assyrians are some aspects
of this culture that cannot be forgotten. Despite it being conquered and
ruled by, amongst others, the Kassites, the Assyrians and the Persians,
Babylonian culture never lost its influence in this region. The Babylonian
era, in total a period of 1,500 years, has left a strong imprint on human
memory, albeit nowadays not always consciously noticed.

131

 
Manifesto for a Democratic Civilization

The Assyrian era can be divided into three periods. The first period
(about 2,000-1,600 BCE) was the period of the merchant kings. They
constructed trade colonies in Cappadocia, for instance Kanesh (close to
today’s Kiiltepe in central Anatolia). The trade colonies stretched from the
eastern Mediterranean to the shores of the Punjab and from the Black Sea
to the Red Sea, with Nineveh—Ilocated near today’s Mosul—as the center
of their activities. This was a blossoming period not only for trade but
for architecture too, as can be seen from the remains of temple-palaces
in ancient cities like Nineveh. In the next period (approximately 1,500-
1,300 BCE) Assyria lost its influence when it became a vassal of Mitanni, a
Hurrian-speaking state. In the Neo-Assyrian Period (approximately 1,300-
612 BCE) Assyria became the most powerful and largest empire the world
had ever seen. Neo-Assyria is infamous for its brutality in war, for ethnic
cleansing and for the total evacuation of a region. In the Assyrian era,
strong resistance grew amongst the various peoples; the strongest resistance
coming from the proto-Kurds (the Hurrians) under the leadership of the
Urartu kings." The fact that the Kurdish people still exist in this area is due
to that resistance. As a matter of fact, the alliance of the Medes (who also
had Hurrian roots) with the Babylonians led to the collapse of this huge
empire around 612 BCE. Assyria was the last empire of Sumerian origin
and made a huge contribution to the development and expansion of this
civilization, especially with regard to trade and architecture.

Central Mesopotamia was the likely conduit through which the
Sumerian civilization expanded when the first centers of civilization (aside
from those of Lower Mesopotamia) developed, even though differences
of form and essence occurred in the new centers of civilization. This area
was the homeland of the Hurrians. The Hurrians are the first group to
be identified in written sources as being related to the Aryan language
and culture group. It may be meaningful to postulate them as the proto-
Kurds. The structural similarities of the languages, as made obvious
by etymological and linguistic analyses, show their connection to the
Kurds. What information we have about them came from archaeological,
linguistic, and ethnological research. The records indicate that they were
an ethnically identifiable group since 6,000 BCE. They probably settled in
the Zagros-Taurus system during the last ice age, where they were part of

132

 
Urban Civilized Society

the Neolithic village and agricultural revolution and the development of
animal husbandry. It seems that some Hurrians lived a sedentary life in
the open plains while others lived a nomadic life in the mountains and
plateaus.'> During the Neolithic, the inhabitants of this zone had the most
contact with the Sumerians, followed by the Arameans—a Semitic group.

Indications of the first civilization with Hurrian origins (if the period of
Neolithic institutionalization from 6,000 to 4,000 BCE is ignored) can be
seen from 3,000 BCE. Those Hurrians that settled in the Sumerian region
made an early transition to urban civilization; those that stayed behind
turned their settlements into city-states as well, but this happened very
slowly due to irrigation and weather conditions. Findings at archaeological
sites in the Tigris and Euphrates river basins such as Kazane, Titris, Gre
Virike, Zeytinlibahce and lately Gébekli Tepe (close to Urfa), including
castle walls, internal and external settlements, structures resembling
temples, statuettes and samples of trading goods, prove the formation of
cities.'® With some of these cities going back as far as 3,000 and 2,750 BCE,
it is realistic to say that they were the first non-Sumerian city groups.” New
archaeological work may well show that the Middle Tigris and Euphrates
river basin was the next big center of the civilization. The findings and the
consequent analyses at Gobekli Tepe may even rewrite history. *®

The next civilization of Hurrian origin expanded to such a degree
that its political administration resembled that of an empire. The state of
Mitanni, with its origins in Central Mesopotamia, lasted from 1,600 BCE
until the rise of the Assyrian empire around 1,250 BCE. The Mitanni
capital city, Washukanni, was probably located on a tributary of the
Euphrates, the Kabhur River, in Syria.”” At its height, the Mitannian
Empire controlled northern Mesopotamia and Syria—from the Tigris
and the region of Assyria to the Mediterranean. The fact that Thutmosis
| described Mitanni as an important military force, indicates just how
influential the empire was.—as does the fact that it was able to hold off
the Assyrians and Babylonians for four hundred years and prevented
Thutmosis III from expanding over the Euphrates. The Mitannians used
hieroglyphics and cuneiform script. Their cultural legacy includes a
unique architecture and a manual on chariotry by a Mitannian named
Kikkuli. Recovered tablets indicate that the language structure of the

133

 
Manifesto for a Democratic Civilization

Mitanni differed from Hurrian, but the two languages had the same
origins. The Mitanni and the Hittites both spoke Aryan languages.”

It is often claimed that the Hittites came through the Straits or that
they were Caucasian and came from the east through Iran. Neither of
these assumptions seem plausible. From the significant traces of Hurrian
language and culture in the Hittite artifacts, we can deduce that the Hittites
were a ruling group of Hurrian noblemen. Their gods, literature, diplomatic
relations, and remnants of Egyptian palaces display their similarity to the
Mitanni of Central Anatolia. In the same period that the Mitanni took
control of the center of the Assyrian empire, the Hittites overwhelmed the
Assyrian colonies and established the Hittite empire. It lasted from about
1,600 to 1,250 BCE. It is quite possible that the Mitanni and Hittite states
were actually two large regions of one huge Hurrian state that we know
nothing about, with a “missing link” between the Mitanni and Hittite
regions. I believe that further investigation may yet uncover evidence to
this effect. Excavations of the important Hittite centers, such as the capital
of the empire, Hattusa, indicate the significant contribution the Hittites
made to the progress of civilization. For instance, Hattusa far surpassed the
sacred settlements of the Ziggurat: temples for religious activities, palaces
for the administration, residence for the workers and storage rooms for
produce were separated and a larger area was protected by castle walls.
Many similar cities can be encountered. As far as governance is concerned,
significant political reforms were proclaimed in the constitutional edict of
Telipinus—for instance, he prescribed that nobles should have legal means
to seek redress should they be dissatisfied with the conduct of the king or
royal family and to not take the law into their own hands. He also decreed
that the pankus (“whole body of citizens”) should constitute the supreme
court for punishment of lawbreakers. Furthermore, in the military field,
the Hittite state was the most advanced of its time.

The cities of Troy and Ahhiyawa to the west of the Hittite empire,
Askava and Kaska to the north, and Cilicia were all neighbors of the
Hittites and had relations with their infamous rival in the south, the
Egyptian pharaoh-state.” In the central region lived the unique people,
the Hattians. They called themselves the people from the “country with
thousand gods”—an indication that their relationship with their gods was

134 W

 
Urban Civilized Society

one of friendship, not of rivalry.”? One of the most famous documents in
history is the treaty between the Egyptian pharaoh Ramses II and the
king of the Hittites, Hattusili ITI.2

Much has already been said about the Egyptian civilization on the
banks of the Nile. Although this civilization seems to have developed
independently, we have to acknowledge that it carried traces of Aryan
cultural values, as shown below. Neither the inner dynamics of the
society on the Nile nor that of its close neighbors had the ability to
produce such a civilization. There is a third possibility, namely that the
Egyptian culture is a reflection of the Aryan culture, absorbed through
the widespread reciprocal migration of the time. The greatness of the
Egyptian civilization cannot be disputed, but neither can the fact that it
did not permanently expand beyond the Nile, nor the fact that there was
no native culture in the Nile area capable of developing into the Egyptian
civilization. The development of the Nile culture, then, must either be
a miracle from above or the result of the Neolithic revolution in the
Taurus-Zagros system. On the other hand, I believe that the influence
the Egyptian civilization had on the Sumerian civilization was far smaller
than its influence on the Greco-Roman civilization.

The center of the Old Kingdom (more or less 2,700-2,200 BCE and
encompassing many dynasties) was the alluvial area in Lower Egypt
around the capital Ineb-Hedg (called Memphis by the Greeks) close to
modern-day Cairo. The numerous monumental gravesites that were
built by the pharaohs during the Old Kingdom, also known as the Age
of Pyramids, display the god-like power of the kings. The abundance
of temples built during the Middle Kingdom (about 2,030-1,640 BCE)
reflects the strong influence of the priests during this period. During
part of the Middle Kingdom, the capital was in Upper Egypt at Waset
(Thebes) at today’s Luxor; Amenemhat I built his capital at Itj-Tawi in
Lower Egypt (probably at today’s town of El-Lisht, close to Cairo). The
Middle Kingdom ended when the Hyksos, a group of mixed Semitic-
Asiatic origin, overthrew the pharaoh regime in about 1,630 BCE. This
accomplishment, something that no one before them could achieve,
shows their cultural and organizational strength. They ruled Egypt for
about one hundred and fifty years. The period of the New Kingdom

135

 
Manifesto for a Democratic Civilization

started in about 1,550 BCE. This period coincided with a period of
development in trade, just as it did in Assyria. Initially, the New Kingdom
had its center in Upper Egypt (the formidable temple complex of Karnak
is an indication of the power of the Theban priests); later, the capital was
moved back to Lower Egypt—to Avaris (close to the Nile Delta) and
Memphis. Although the priests were still strong during this period, they
were secondary to the kings—except in isolated cases as during the reign
of Ramses II, when the high priest of Amun at Thebes in effect ruled
Upper Egypt. The Semitic Hebrew tribe arrived in Egypt in about 1,600
BCE (that is, after the arrival of the Hyksos) and returned to the Middle
East after three hundred years, in about 1,300 BCE. Their stay in Egypt
thus coincided with the rule of King Akhenaton (1,350 to 1,334 BCE),
famous for declaring the first monotheistic state religion in history.
Many princesses from both the Hittite and Mitanni kingdoms were sent
to the Egyptian palaces as brides.* Since about 1,000 BCE, tribal attacks
from the south by groups of Sudanese-Abyssinian origin, and attacks
by the Assyrians since 670 BCE, weakened the Egyptian state. In 664
BCE, the Assyrians conquered Memphis and Thebes. Egypt, then, was
no match for the Achaemenid Persians, and in 525 BCE it became part |
of the Persian Empire. Alexander conquered Egypt in 333 BCE. When in
30 BC, toward the beginning of the Christian era, the Ptolemaic queen
Cleopatra was defeated by Rome, it meant the end of the third phase of §
the four thousand year old civilization.

The question will always be: Sumer or Egypt, who influenced whom?
The Egyptian civilization shows authenticity in terms of shipbuilding,
the erecting of stone columns, wall paintings, the art of calendar making,
medicine, astrology and mummification. But the hieroglyphic writing
system is more primitive than the cuneiform system of the Sumerians—
its functionality is limited. The Egyptian religious structure is more like
a complex copy of the Sumerian system: while the Isis-Osiris tradition
could be derived from the Inanna-Enki tradition, the Amon Ra tradition
is very close to the Ziggurat system of the Sumerian priests.

Excavated tombs attest to the advanced architecture of the Egyptians.
Though these are architectural wonders, they also are the manifestation
of a frenzy that consumed a frightening amount of slave labor. This

136

 
Urban Civilized Society

civilization, which has left as big a footprint in history as Sumer, practiced
the classical slave system in its purest form. In no other civilization has the
unity of slave and master reached the level it had in Egypt. As in Sumer,
the promise of an after-world offered by Egyptian religion was a strong
legitimization device needed to convince the slaves, who certainly did not
have an easy life. It is this strong civilizational region that invented the
paradigm of heaven, hell and the life to come. There is a strong possibility
that Egyptian religion influenced the Abrahamic religions as much as the
Sumerian and Babylonian religious beliefs did. The fact that Moses was
brought up in the Egyptian culture, and that his ancestor Abraham fled
from the Babylonian Nimrods, reminds us of the strong influence of these
two cultures upon, and their synthesis in, the Abrahamic religions. In its
original form, the Egyptian pharaoh regime shows many characteristics of
what today we would describe as state communism.

Urartu was also a first generation civilization. It is believed that after
a long era of being a confederation, the Urartu civilization took its first
step toward becoming a centralized kingdom around 870 BCE due to a
continuous struggle between the Assyrians and the Nairians.”* The Assyrian
inscription stating that King Sarduri defeated all those that crossed him
with the support and protection of the god Haldi may have heralded his
magnificent march to a centralized kingdom.? It is presumed that Urartu
was the first state consisting of provinces with a centralized government.
This strong, centralized state stretched from the eastern skirts of the
Zagros to the western shores of the Euphrates, from the Aras valleys in the
north to the Assyrian region in the south, as far as the northern border of
today’s Syria. The area around today’s Van was their headquarters. It was
named Tushpa, most probably after the ancient god of the sun, Teshup.
Many castles were built in the area of their headquarters. Their system of
belief was strongly influenced by the Sumerians and the Assyrians. They
exchanged their hieroglyphic script for Assyrian cuneiform script. Besides
Urartu (which seems to be related to Hurrian and the languages of the
tribes migrating from north-eastern Caucasia) Assyrian was used as court
language. After the fall of the Urartian state in the sixth century BCE, the
use of Urartu was limited to the elite while the common people spoke a
language related to proto-Armenian.

137

 
Manifesto for a Democratic Civilization

It may not be unwarranted to call Urartu the strongest civilization
of the Iron Age. Many weapons, cauldrons, plates and clothes made
of an iron-copper mixture have survived. It seems that they were the
earliest civilization to have used processed iron ona huge scale. Besides
advancing to a civilization stage of urbanization and having an official
capital, they developed the new concept of a centralized state. Their road
network was excellent—one can still make out the routes. The royal tombs
carved into rocks are magnificent. Enslaved neighboring peoples were
used in the construction of castles and cities. They were quite advanced
in their water channel systems and the making of ponds. They resisted
the Assyrians for three hundred years—a conflict that led to both states
being defeated by the Medes and their allies. History has not witnessed a
similar political formation in this geographical since.

The Medo-Persian Empire constituted the final, magnificent rise of
this first generation of civilizations. The word Mede came from the ancient
Greeks. The historian Herodotus said, “The Medes were called ‘ancient’
by all people Aryan” and, indeed, we can call the culture of the Median
descendants authentically Aryan because no other group has succeeded
in occupying their land. The Median culture was shaped at the Zagros
mountain range and can be traced back to the Gutians and Kassites. (A
common approach is to classify all these tribes as Hurrian.) These tribal
clans were probably the groups that suffered most from constant clashes
with the Assyrians and we can surmise that this resistance was the reason
behind their statehood, although they also had clashes with the Scythians
that came from the Caucasus.

The Medes had a reasonably successful confederation after the tribal
clans loosely united in 715 BCE. The continuous oppression by Assur and
Urartu led the Medes into an alliance with the Scythians (forming alliances
seem to be a historical tradition). Despite the fact that the leadership often
changed hands, they destroyed the Urartu palaces (around 615 BCE)
and shortly afterwards burnt down the city of Assur—one of the capitals
of Assyria—to end these last two strong civilizations of Mesopotamia.
According to Herodotus, their famed capital Ecbatana (present-day
Hamadan in Iran) was surrounded by seven circular walls of different
colors. Their short-lived period of rule was closely linked to their relation

138

 
Urban Civilized Society

with the Persian tribes, who were close relatives. The political formation
that they had built up over three hundred years was snatched by the
Persian Achaemenid Empire. The Persian Cyrus the Great, grandson of the
Median king Astyages, allied with the military commander of the palace,
Harpagus, in order to overthrow his overlord, King Astyages, in a terrible
coup. The historical records of Herodotus claim that, faced with this coup,
Astyages said to Harpagus, “What a wretched soul! Now that you have
overthrown me, why have you given the power to a Persian bastard? Why
did you transfer the power to the Persian and not be ruler yourself? At least
it could have stayed with the Medes!”

I believe Herodotus called all those of Hurrian cultural origin
“Medes.” He respected them highly, seeing the Persians as secondary to
them. He was correct in conceiving the cultural stamp of the region to be
that of the Medes. The Persians, at the time, were at the beginning of their
fame in history. The magnificence of the Hurrian culture was even then
famous from the shores of the Aegean to Elam and from the Caucasus to
the Egyptian palaces, as disclosed by Herodotus.

A similar role as the one played by the initial priests, namely to construct
the new mentality and gods within the Sumerian civilization, was played by
priest in the establishment of the Urartu and Medo-Persian civilizations.
The priests called the Magi were probably symbolic figures or else magi was
the title for the Zoroastrian priests, who had their central, sacred town at
Musasir.”” We can thus assume that the initial pantheon of their gods was
established there and later taken to Tushpa, Ecbatana and Persepolis.

Without an old tradition of priesthood it is difficult to build important
civilizations. The philosophers and their philosophy in the Greek culture,
and the intellectuals of the Age of Enlightenment in the European
civilization, played a similar role. (It may be instructive to see the sheikh
of the Semitics and the Hebrew prophets in the same role.) The role played
by the Magi and Zoroaster should also be recognized—especially in the
rise of the Medes. It is my conviction that the Magi and the foundation of
the Zoroastrian belief and morals reflect the values of the Neolithic society
by seeing fire, agriculture and livestock as sacred. A belief and moral
system like that could not have been contaminated with the impurities
of civilization. It is different from the inventions of the Sumerian priests,

139

 
Manifesto for a Democratic Civilization

such as their masked god-kings. In fact, it is the opposite. It rests on the
idea that the universe is full of contention between good and evil, light and
darkness. The fundamental norm within the Zoroastrian priesthood is the
existence of free morality—it does not speak of how to manufacture gods,
but of the sacredness of agriculture, livestock and the characteristics of free
human beings.”® These morals played a determining role in the defeat of
Assur and the rise of the Medo-Persian Empire.

After the death of Cyrus, a group of Mede origin gained power
during a coup in 528 BCE. However, they were easily eliminated and
the infamous rule of Darius began.”® In a very short time, after the
collapse of the Ionian cities in Babylonia, Egypt and the Aegean shores,
the most extensive empire was established that history had seen till
then—stretching from the Aegean to the shores of the Pencav (“Five
waters,” the Punjab River). It was the strongest civilization of its time,
excluding China. Undoubtedly, it had been influenced by the cultures
of the Sumerian, Assyrian, Babylonian and Urartu civilizations. On the
other hand, it had been nurtured by the free spirit of the Aryan culture.
It also had relations with the Scythians coming from the north via the
Greek culture and the proto-Turks from the East, and certainly had been
influenced by these cultures as well. It thus presented history with a
unique example of a synthesis of numerous cultures.

The Medo-Persian Empire is the final and most extensive representative
of the first generation civilization.* It reached the highest level attainable |
in a first generation civilization. Their innovative architecture and the
magnificence of their headquarters can still be seen in the remnants of
Persepolis. The power of the state centers was almost on par with that of the
Roman Empire and it prepared the ground for the Greco-Roman world. -
The Medo-Persian Empire is famous for its political system of multi-states, -
each with a degree of autonomy and governed by a satrap—a vassal king.
It is also famous for its tremendous postal and transportation systems, its
special security forces, the Immortals Regiment, and an army consisting -
of hundreds of thousands of people.*! The Zoroastrian belief system and
religious rituals were totally new. A distinction developed between the |
religion of the nobles, who were Zoroastrians, and the ordinary people, who
continued the ancient worship of the sun god Mithra. The development

140

 
Urban Civilized Society

they brought to the different fields of civilization was greater than the
sum of those who preceded them. They were the first to unify numerous
numbers of tribes, clans, religions, sects, languages and cultures. It is the last
glorious and dazzling Middle-Eastern civilization of antiquity and superior
in all aspects to the newly developing Greek civilization. Alexander, the
student of Aristotle, was one of the new breed of barbarian invaders craving
to possess this magnificence, but with a profound feeling of inferiority
toward the Eastern culture. What the Roman Empire meant for the Goths,
the Persian Empire meant for the Macedonian and Greek tribal chiefs and
petty kings. If we look at Alexander’s invasion from this perspective, a more
meaningful and accurate interpretation may be achieved.

Let us conclude this section with a few additional points, the first of
which concerns the Hebrew clan. Let me reiterate that from 1,700 BCE
onward, the Aryan language and culture, the Semitic language and culture,
the civilizations of Sumerian origin and the civilizations of Egyptian
origin shared some characteristics. In the sacred book of the Hebrews the
names of Surug, Urfa and Harran are explicitly mentioned as the ancestral
location of Abraham, from where the tribe seemed to have travelled to
Egypt.** They made a living mainly through animal husbandry, although
they seemed to have practiced some trade as well. Their religious belief
apparently hovered between Yahweh and El (which was later to become
Allah). They resisted assimilation into civilization—their monotheistic
belief may have much to do to with this resistance. They have the privilege
of developing tribal theism. It began with Abraham’s opposition to the
Babylonian King Nimrod and continued with Moses’s opposition to the
pharaoh, and would later continue in Palestine as conflicts with many of
the tribes and their gods. They continued to preserve their uniqueness
for a long time under the leadership of priests of which Aaron, Moses’
younger brother, was the first.

The initial period of leadership by priests, initiated by Moses, ended
with the renowned priest Samuel. In 1,020 BCE started the period of
the kingdoms with kings like Saul, David, Solomon and others. They
constructed a small kingdom with a strong military and political
character. There seemed to have been continuous conflict between
the kings and the priests. Both those who resisted and those who

141

 
Manifesto for a Democratic Civilization

collaborated with the Assyrians were defeated around 720 BCE and
around 540 BCE their exodus to Babylon began. They were freed when
the Persians ended the rule of the Babylonians. Two collaborationist
parties, the Sadducees and the Pharisees, came to the fore during the
conflicts between the Persians and the Greeks. Later, resistance against
the Romans resulted in the first and second waves of exiles, first to
Egypt and Anatolia and later to all parts of the known world.” Then the
resistance of Jesus followed. His death by crucifixion started the second
religion of Abrahamic origin—and the troublesome relationship
between the Greco-Roman and European civilizations on the one hand
and the small Hebrew tribe on the other. Most leaders of the Hebrew
tribe were rabbis or nabis; the long list of prophets ending with Jesus
and Mohammed (though the last two are not recognized as prophets
in Judaism).* Religious conflict accompanied by political conflict
continued. The period of scribes started with the end of the Roman
rule and this tradition continues to date with a generation of writers
and intellectuals as strong as that of the prophets. In time, the pre-
historic small step in the direction of trade played a leading role in the
birth of capitalism and the dominance of today’s finance capital. The |
Hebrew tribe has always been small in numbers but they have a strong
influence on the history of civilization. The Hebrew tribe should be
studied as intensively as civilization itself as, even today, they appear to
be the emperors of science, law and money. My personal story reflects
the history of this tribe in the miniature: I too started my resistance by
making my exit from Surug in Urfa, similar to Abraham. However, my =
resistance led to a crucifixion different to that of Jesus.”
Another point that needs to be noted is the Scythian influx from
the north around 800 BCE. The Scythians had Caucasian roots. These
tribes, who expanded to inner Europe and Asia and from the Russian
steps to Mesopotamia, did not really leave strong traces behind, as their
expansion was physical rather than cultural. However, they did play a role
in the establishment and collapse of many empires, including that of the
Hebrew tribe. They served as soldiers and chamber women in the palaces.
This continued in the time of the Ottoman Empire and even today in the
Republic of Turkey. It is evident that they could not protect their own

142

 
Urban Civilized Society

identity as well as the Hebrews did. Scythian and similar peoples of the
first generation civilized society should also be studied thoroughly.

The center-periphery model is useful when studying the formation of
historical systems.* When talking about centers of civilization, the question
of what happened in the periphery is obviously important. When Sumer
and Egypt, the first centers of civilization were constructed, the Amorite
and the Apiru were the peripheral powers in their areas of influence; for the
Chinese it was the proto-Turk Huns and for the Romans the Goths. When
the chiefs of these tribes acquired and learnt how to use the weapons of
civilization, they were either in a continuous state of offense or defense with
the civilized states. Their fate was either to dissolve in one of the dominant
centers of civilization or to establish a similar center of civilization in the
periphery. For example, the Amorite Akkadians constructed their own
dynasty after being on the offensive for along time. The Hebrews established
their own kingdom based on what they learnt from Egypt. Although the
Huns were one of the strongest peripheral groups, they finally dissolved
within the civilization centers of China, Europe and Iran. Usually, the
chief of a peripheral tribe remained in the center of the civilization as an
administrative chief and became totally integrated; the clansman, on the
other hand, remained marginal for a long time or made new attempts at
establishing their own center of civilization under a new chief, The Gothic
attacks on Rome laid the basis for the German princedoms—at times
Gothic leaders even wore the Roman crown. An interesting example is
the Mongolian and Oghuz tribes that developed as a peripheral force to
the Byzantine Empire’s central force. However, the conflict that continued
for hundreds of years ended with these tribes transforming themselves
into central powers. The Scythians were a peripheral force for the first
generation centers of civilization, playing their role mostly in the north,
especially in the Caucasus. When they became acquainted with the various
civilizations and took up their arms, they became a force of extraordinary
offensive strength. It is thought that they were quite active between 800 and
500 BCE. Although they played their role well as mercenaries and palace
servants, they were not able to establish significant centers of civilization
on their own behalf.

143

 
Manifesto for a Democratic Civilization

b. Developments in the Chinese, Indian and Native American cultures

It will be instructive to look at the developments in other systems of
civilization with their own specific characteristics, namely the Chinese,
Indian and Native American cultures.

China was one of the most important regions to which migrating
groups from south-east Siberia had moved at the end of the last ice
age (around 10,000 BCE). The fertile land at the shores of the seas and
streams, and its resulting rich fauna and flora, was conducive to both
the Neolithic culture and city-civilizations. Around 4,000 BCE, history
notes the development of the Chinese Neolithic revolution. For us, the
important question is to what degree this was an authentic Neolithic
agricultural revolution or whether it was strongly influenced by the
expansion of the Aryan culture. Indications are that the Aryan Neolithic
culture had been established at least six thousand years before the
Chinese Neolithic and thus could have influenced the latter. However,
the question remains whether this was a determinant influence. History
tells us that big cultural revolutions do not form very easily and that their |
formation needs unique conditions and the longue durée. I think that the
Chinese Neolithic and civilization were as original and native as Chinese
socialism and capitalism. (There should not be a misunderstanding here:
I have no doubt that even the most nationalist capitalism is imported.
This also holds true for China.) It may then follow that the Chinese
Neolithic could not have expanded into Vietnam, the Indo-Chinese
Peninsula, Japan, Indonesia and the Korean Peninsula before 4000 BCE.

The birth of the Chinese slave-owning civilization took place around
1,500 BCE. The initial central empire was established around this date and
was considered sacred. It was the Uruk of China. Just as with the Sumerian
and Egyptian civilizations, around 1,000 BCE a period of disintegrationand
expansion followed the establishment of the Chinese civilization. During
this second period, many city-states were established and, similar to what

happened during the Ur period in the Sumerian civilization, intense city
rivalry caused numerous wars. During the third period (from 250 BCE to
the year 250), the feudal, centralized dynasties (of native or foreign origins)
grew strong once again and outweighed the rest. This continued until the
beginning of the twentieth century. The Chinese civilization is thought

144

 
Urban Civilized Society

to have expanded to Indochina, the Japanese islands and Central Asia—
including the areas of the Mongolians and proto-Turkish peoples.

What is interesting is not the inventions of gods similar to that of the
Sumerian priests, but the wise men’s interpretation of the universe. The
way they comprehended and interpreted the universe and nature was more
scientific than that of Sumer, and it is instructive to see how they defined
energy. They envisioned that the universe was alive. In general, Chinese
philosophy can be described as Taoism—it can also be called sagacious.
Confucius (500 BCE) tried to establish the principles and morals of a
civilized city and state order. The cornerstone of his doctrine is that the
governance of the state society must be based on sound moral principles
instead of official laws. Confucius lived in the same period as Zoroaster
and Socrates and influenced civilized society as much as they did. These
great sages all emphasized the importance of morals and core virtues.

The Chinese made important advances with regard to material
civilization. In terms of industrial development they were ahead of the
West. They were the inventors of paper, gunpowder and printing. The
Chinese were positioned at the east end of trade, where the ancient Silk
Road began. China had opened itself to capitalism around the middle of
the 19th century. Today, it has grown gigantically and, as a new Leviathan,
it is watched with close interest as to what it will do and how it will expand.

The other civilizations of Chinese origin—such as Japan, Indonesia,
Vietnam and Korea—advanced in a similar way, spreading the main
civilization. It is not important for our topic to explore this in more detail.

A local Neolithic development cannot be observed in India. The
Aryans probably entered India for the first time circa 2,000-1,500 BCE. The
Neolithic revolution there was indeed related to this influx. Priests, just as
with the Sumerians, led not only this revolution but also the revolution of
the civilization that began circa 1,000 BCE. The Veda, the primary sacred
book of the priest class, the Brahmin priests, was probably created around
1,500 BCE.” It is the story of the construction of the priest class on the basis
of their supreme divinity. This became the foundation for the caste regime.
Around 1,000 BCE, the Rajahs—the political and military strong men—
appeared. They waged fierce battles against the Brahmins and established
themselves as the new rulers of the state, just as it had happened in all other

145

 
Manifesto for a Democratic Civilization

civilizations. They then formed the second caste. As in China, the fertile

river and seashores were suitable for farming. Around 1,000 BCE, the cities
started to expand, but they were still characterized by their large palaces
and temples. Agriculture developed quickly and farmers and craftsmen
constituted the third caste. At the bottom were the Untouchables. Even
coming into contact with them was considered a sin.

The priests created a very colorful theology. They constructed, besides
the main gods, numerous divine entities. A profound Sumerian influence
can be detected in Hindu religion. The mind-boggling abundance of
deities may be attributed to the fact that this pantheon has its origins
elsewhere and a thorough synthesis has not yet been achieved.

As in all the other important civilizations of the time, in India a great
religious reformist was born around 500 BCE named Buddha.™ Buddha
based his reform on morals and not on gods. Seeing the great pain in
nature and society, he tried to develop a compensatory metaphysical
doctrine. Buddhism is a doctrine with a strong environmentalist
character and is critical of civilization. It is a doctrine that needs to be
considered seriously, especially in terms of its moral metaphysics. Itis a -
regime of vigorous implementation, self-control and self-improvement. '
It expanded swiftly in China, Indochina and Japan. Another religious
tradition, reminiscent of the Dionysian cult, took root in India, namely
that of the god Krishna. It was strongly influenced by the Neolithic |
and mountain cultures, nomadic life, free women and love stories—
it was based on a morality that highly valued the desire to live freely.
The contrast between the religion of the Brahmins and these last two
religions with their radically different metaphysics and their disregard
for materialistic values, reflects the complexities of the Indian society and
the profound differences in life styles in this country.

The Indian civilization became a centralized political structure after
the invasions of the Persians and Alexander the Great. Around 300 BCE,
the Emperor Ashoka adopted the Buddhist reforms. He was the first to.
achieve a thorough centralization of the maverick and widespread Rajahs
(reminiscent of the relationship between the Zoroastrian religious
reform and the establishment of the centralized Medo-Persian Empire).
Ashoka was unable to completely eradicate the maverick and chaotic life

146

%l

 
Urban Civilized Society

of the Rajahs. Around the year 1,000 CE, they faced incursions from the
Muslim states and in the early 1,500, they once again became part of a
centralized state under the leadership of the Moghuls—Muslim emperors
of Mongolian origin. A certain civilizational progress was attained and
therefore expansion continued. The infiltration that began around 1,500
and that rested upon capitalism entered a new phase in the mid 19th
century with the colonialism of English capitalism. After World War 11
India gained independence, though it lost its north-eastern and north-
western parts to the new Muslim states of Pakistan and Bangladesh.
Nevertheless, in order to continue its existence, the Subcontinent as a
whole—from the skirts of the Himalayas to the wide shores of its seas and
rivers—needs to infuse its complex cultural richness with that of capitalist
civilization. It will be very interesting to see how the Subcontinent will
progress as it becomes acquainted with democracy, seeing that it has
such a complex religious, artistic and moral structure and such diverse
language and political structures.

The expansion of civilization to the American continent occurred in
two stages. The first stage may have occurred around 10,000 BCE, when
some groups migrated to North America via the Bering Strait, and from
there they spread to South America.”® They became acquainted with
the Neolithic revolution around 3,000 BCE and by the year 500 BCE
the initial stages of civilization occurred. In the east of the Americas,
from Mexico to Chile, the Native Americans established initial
civilizations, known as the Aztec, Mayan and the Inca civilizations.
These civilizations, which resembled the Uruk civilization of the
initial Sumer period, petered out, unable to establish big cities and
multiply their numbers—possibly because of weather and geographical
conditions. When the Europeans arrived these civilizations were still
in existence, albeit weakly. The strong structure of their cities and the
remnants of their temples are impressive. If they had the opportunity
to expand into the continent, they might have succeeded in establishing
multiple centers and attain centralization. In these civilizations too
one can see the weight of the priests, indeed, they may also be called
“priest-civilizations.” They practiced the frightening ritual of sacrificing
youngsters."’ They developed the use of a sign system that resembled

147

 
Manifesto for a Democratic Civilization

writing. They had an advanced calendar and they introduced a variety
of plant and animal species to the world. At the time, North America
had not yet come into contact with civilization. The boom of the
civilization in the American continent really began with the European
invasion and colonization of the 16th century. In the 19th century,
as part of the new capitalist development of civilization, seemingly
independent nations were born in the Americas. In reality, they were
nation-states of capitalism; they joined and became integrated with the
world system. After World War 11, America—specifically the United
States—has continued its ascent as the system’s hegemonic power. The
exciting quest by South America (for instance Cuba, Venezuela and
Bolivia) to seek a new model of civilization as an alternative to the
capitalist civilization of European and USA origin continues.

The role that Europe, the huge Leviathan of our age, played during the
time that the initial civilization came into being was that of institutionalizing
the Neolithic culture. Around 100 BCE, at the time of the expansion of the
Roman Empire, there were no signs of civilization in the rest of Europe.
Many battles were waged between the tribes—the Scythians, Huns, Goths,
Celtics, Nordics and so forth. Migration was common at the time. Apart
from village and agricultural development, there was also a small trade
in metals. I keep the Greek and Roman cultures separate from the rest i
of Europe because I discuss these two regions at the western end of the
Middle Eastern civilization under a separate heading.

Mother Africa—where man learnt to walk, search for food with tools
in hand, and attained speech—continued to be devoted to this deep-rooted
culture of hers. Further than the Sudan, the Egyptian civilization was
unknown and the Christian civilization only advanced as far as Ethiopia.
The entire northern part of the continent became Muslim as it was
occupied by the Semitic Arabs, who flourished with the Islamic civilization.
Finally, in the 19th century, Africa was overrun by the European capitalist
civilization. Africa, with its difficulty to digest the different civilizations due
to its internal structure, is a bewildering conglomerate of different cultures
and stages of civilization. As with South America and the Middle East, we
are anxiously waiting to see whether it will integrate with civilization and
modernity or whether it will choose free life.

148

 
Urban Civilized Society

¢. Greco-Roman civilization and problems associated with its expansions

We examined the expansion of the Sumerian and Egyptian based
civilizations together, because they developed more or less at the same
time, mutually influencing each other during their development stages
and continuing to do so during their periods of expansion. Furthermore,
their shared Middle Eastern roots are another reason for their unison.
It is a characteristic feature of this region that at birth they are already
intertwined." These two cultures were the inventors of many of the “firsts”
of history. It cannot be denied that all the other expansions that succeeded
them were formed on the basis of the essence and on the pattern of these
two civilizations. Although the successor civilizations were not exactly
similar, there is no doubt that they were bound by their shared roots. The
initial slave-owning civilization was the Sumerian one, followed by the
Egyptian civilization; this model then spread itself around the world with
little change. I doubt that any civilization can be analyzed effectively if the
Egyptian and Sumerian civilizations are not taken into account.

However, there are problems associated with this model. Firstly, we
need to clarify what the level of influence between the Sumerian and the
Egyptian civilizations was, and secondly, we need to determine whether
the Medo-Persian civilization, the first to be constructed outside of the
Mesopotamian centers, originated from the same or a different source. It
is clear that the Medo-Persian civilization adopted many of its essential
characteristics from Sumer, and later from Babylonia, Assyria and Urartu.
However, they achieved areas of major and unique reform, of which the
Zoroastrian moral revolution (quite similar to the moral of freedom), a
centralized state system, and an immensely effective military order were
the most important. For this reason, I treat the Medo-Persian Empire as
a civilization distinct from the Sumerian-Egyptian civilization, but as the
cdnnecting link between the Sumerian-Egyptian and the Greco-Roman
civilizations. If seen in the correct historical perspective, such similarities
and differences can play an important role in determining the phases
of civilization. If we discard these factors, the Greco-Roman civilization
will not be analyzed properly or the analysis will be overly complex due
to unscientific interpretations and because some characteristics will have
to be attributed to miraculous origins.

149

 
Manifesto for a Democratic Civilization

Thirdly, there is the question of the origins of the Chinese and Indian
civilizations. I believe that we should not treat them as independent.
This approach will allow us to analyze the similarities and the differences
between civilizations. Even if we accept the South American, Harappa
and Mohenjo-daro civilizations as distinct, it is clear that they were not
able to move beyond the initial city-states phase (the Uruk-type state) and
faded away. As a result, Africa, Europe (apart from the Greco-Romans)
and even Australia became civilized during a much later expansion;
all these areas, including the Americas, became civilized only with the
expansion of capitalism.

I hope that these short remarks will aid me in defining the Greco-
Roman civilization and analyzing its expansion.

Undeniably, the Greco-Roman civilization was superior to that of the
Medes and Persians. However, it would be a historical distortion and short-
sightedness to claim that this superiority resulted solely from conditions
in continental Greece and the Greek peninsula; we also have to consider
the widespread expansion and the characteristics of the civilization
from the Middle East—started by the Egyptians and Sumerians and
then developed further by their successors, the Babylonians, Assyrians,
Mitannians, Hittites, Urartus, Medes and Persians. All the inventions .
and the developments in the area of religion, morals, philosophy, arts,
politics and science came into being during the birth, progress, strife and
conflict of these civilizations. Furthermore, they came about as a result
of the significant inheritance from Neolithic society. The Europeans were
ignorant of these fields of knowledge until much later—such knowledge
only became firmly established amongst Europeans with the Renaissance
of the Greek and Roman cultures. They then proclaimed that all were the
inventions and innovation of the Greeks and Romans themselves. Hence,
they now carry the sole responsibility for this faulty understanding of the
Greco-Roman civilization.

If Herodotuss history were read more carefully, discovering the
sources of Greek culture wouldn’t have been that difficult. All available
historical documents suggest that continental Greece and the Greek
peninsula were penetrated by the Indo-European language and culture
from about 5,000 BCE, and that it underwent a Neolithic revolution,

150

 
e e T -

 

Urban Civilized Society

To obtain a proper historical understanding of this period, we need to
establish the source of these influences. It is possible that a later wave of
migration, around 1,800 BCE, brought the inventions of the civilization
to this area. These immigrants later progressed to the stage of the city-
state (similar to that of Uruk) around 400 BCE. This attainment was
influenced significantly by the Hittites, who referred to this region in
their documents as Ahhiyawa.

Reciprocal trade within the region began around 3,000 BCE via
Troy—a city vital for Continental Greece and the Greek peninsula at the
time.* The Hittites brought to this region both the ideological inventions
(gods, literature, science, etc.) and material inventions (especially things
that could be traded such as metal, pottery and weaved goods) of the
Middle East. They played a significant role in channeling these inventions
into civilization. The Phoenicians, on the other hand, taught the early
Greeks the art of navigation and their alphabet. Egypt also had a significant
influence on them—both directly and through the Minoans on Crete.
Thus, all the inventions of the Middle Eastern civilizations nurtured the
Greek culture continuously via these four channels. Later, Solon (638-558
BCE), Pythagoras (570-495 BCE) and Thales (624-546 BCE) visited the
Egyptian, Babylonian and the Medo-Persian palaces and schools in order
to learn and bring back the lessons and its system of rule.

After the fall of Troy around 1,200 BCE, the area was invaded by
the Ionian, Dorian and Aeolian tribes. The Egyptians called the people
who made these early attacks the “Sea Peoples,” and, according to the
Egyptians, they were involved with the fall of Troy as well.** These groups,
which crowded in to western Anatolia and the Aegean Islands, were seen
as barbarians by the Troy and Hittite civilizations. Indeed, the Hittite
country and the small kingdom of Troy were the centers of civilization
in the area. Barbarians can only become civilized after a long period of
settlement in an established, civilized culture and this is indeed what
happened: after a long period of settlement in continental Greece, the
peninsula and the Aegean regions, the establishment of cities began after
700 BCE." Besides influence from the Middle East, the urbanization
around the Aegean shores also had an element of authenticity. This
unique synthesis of a rich and diverse cultural heritage combined with

151
Manifesto for a Democratic Civilization

the extraordinary flora and fauna of the region, gave the new cities their
own unique identity. The cultural and ideological components inherited
from the Middle East were adapted; some important changes were made
and then synthesized with a partially new essence. Thus, their inventions
and innovations encompassed (and excelled) those of the Neolithic,
Sumerian, Egyptian, Hittite, Urartu and Medo-Persian cultures.

The most important question here is: Where was the center of this, the
biggest intellectual revolution in history? The initial city of the region was
destroyed around 1,200 BCE and a period of chaos—the so-called Greek
Dark Ages—followed.** In this period, the only settlements were a few
Phoenician trade colonies. Thus, until around 700 BCE, there was no
civilization in continental Greece or the Greek peninsula. The Achaeans
leaders of the time were not called kings (that would require a city-
state) but tribal chiefs—they were clearly still in a phase of barbarism.
Although Athens was already well known in the 7th century BCE, it was
still far from being a center of civilization. The cities formed by the tribes
on the eastern shores of the Aegean played a more central role.

The most famous names of the Greek intelligentsia of the time (for
instance Homer, most of the Seven Sages, Thales, Heraclitus, Democritus
and Pythagoras) were all from the cities on the east Aegean shores and
islands. Many of the famous gods (including Apollo) were from this or
nearby regions. The most famous temples and centers of prophecy were
also in this region. At the time, the material civilization here was much |
more advanced than in Continental Greece and on the Peninsula.

Other evidence may include the existence of the Ionian cities—as the '
new Aegean centers of civilization—at the same time as, or just after, the
Hittites, Phrygians and Lydians.

Thus, continental Greece and the peninsula have the attributes of
being sequels to the cities of the eastern Aegean. The invasion of this
region by the Medo-Persian Empire around 545 BCE resulted in the
center of Greek civilization shifting to Athens. All the ideological and
material achievements of the civilization on the Aegean shore were
moved to Athens. Most of the intellectuals took refuge in Athens or
southern Italy. Under Persian rule, the region slowly lost its importance
and Athens had a period of glory.

152

 
Urban Civilized Society

Undoubtedly, the Persian civilization was the most magnificent
civilizations of its time. It not only took from the Greek regions, it also
contributed in many ways. However, because the region on the eastern
shore of the Aegean lost its independence, it lost its first and last chance
to establish a great civilization. If this had not happened, I believe that
they would have spread all over Anatolia, establishing a magnificent
civilization, larger than that of the Sumerians, Egyptians, Chinese,
Hittites, Persians and even the Byzantines. Then the Greek and the
Italian Peninsulas probably would have been states dependent to them.
The presence of the Persians in the Aegean not only caused the end of
the Persian Empire itself, but also prevented the Aegean from leading a
great system of civilization. We can but lament this. Alexander tried to
establish such a center in the name of Macedonia, but all he achieved
was a complex, poly-centric culture that was a synthesis between the
East and the West. Although it is called the Hellenic “culture,” it did
not progress beyond being an eclectic synthesis; it is by no means an
authentic creation. Later, under the Roman Empire, the Aegean had no
opportunity to develop apart from it being a state with Pergamum as its
center. Thus, again development in the eastern Aegean was stunted.

Indeed, in terms of expansion in size and increase in the number
of cities, the Athens-centered civilization should be viewed as a true
civilization. It left its mark on the era in terms of ideological and material
civilization. When analyzing Athens, we should view it as a new compound
formed out of all the previous civilizations. All the progress of the Neolithic
culture, the ideological and material inventions gained during the long
history of civilization, were integrated with the local influences, realizing
the biggest revolution of civilization. The most important characteristic of
the Athenian revolution was the embracing of philosophy as ideology and
as an alternative form of belief to paganism. Philosophy paved the way
for a blossoming of knowledge and understanding. This is the era when
the seeds of all the different philosophical branches were sown: idealism,
materialism, and dialectics. Before Socrates, natural philosophy was the
priority; with Socrates, social philosophy became more influential. The
growth of the social question as a result of suppression and exploitation
played a role in this development. (With “social question” I mean the

153

 
Manifesto for a Democratic Civilization

establishment of the city-trade-state-administrational chain of events.)
Furthermore, the city as a material civilization more or less forced this
philosophical thought: The city itself means a break with organic society;
thus, a mentality removed from nature will easily be shaped in the city. The
city civilization is established on the basis of betrayal of the environment
and is the root of all abstract, vulgar metaphysic and materialistic thought.

Therefore, although philosophy is on the one hand a breakthrough
in thinking, on the other it creates alienation from the environment. The
sages who spread philosophy and knowledge were the intellectuals of
their era—ijust like the 18th century European intellectuals. They taught
the children of the well-off families in return for money. The philosophers
established their own schools just as the priests of Sumer used religious |
inventions and temples. In a way, they established their own churches
(or assemblies). Just like polytheistic religions, they formed multiple
philosophical schools. Each of the schools may be viewed as a religion
or a denomination. Religions, since they are forms of thought, may also
be seen as philosophies that had become traditional, institutionalized
and then took the form of a belief system. We should not think that
the difference between religion and philosophy makes them complete
opposites. Where religion is more the ideological nourishment of
the ruled classes, philosophy is more nourishment for the youth and
intellectuals of the privileged classes. Plato and Aristotle attempted to
succeed in the priests’ duty to construct, defend and liberate the city-state '
through the use of philosophy. The main task of the philosophers was .
to determine how the city-state and society would be administered and -
defended and, more importantly, how it should be constituted.

The second important characteristic of the Athenian civilization
was the emphasis it put on the theoretical and practical aspects of what
democracy and republic meant. Although this was a democracy only for
the aristocracy, it was an important phase in the history of civilization
in general. Citizenship of the city was restricted to a small number of

people—likely not even ten percent of society. Still, it was a critical
innovation. It also played an important role in shaping philosophy and
the art of politics. Democracy would entail that the people deal with
politics themselves—they handled their own administrational work. The

154

 
Urban Civilized Society

essence of democracy is that people think, discuss and decide on critical
social issues. Thus, the democratic politics of the Athenian civilization is
a vital contribution to civilization.

In the Athenian Parthenon, the Greek gods proclaimed themselves
through a brand new form of architecture. Here, it was far more obvious
that the gods were products of human invention than it was in the sacred
houses of the Sumerian civilizations. The traditional religious belief was
gradually losing its value—almost as if the Sumerian founders of cities and
gods were living their last days in the civilizations of Athens and Rome.
Athens, the founding city of the Greco-Roman civilization, received its
name from the goddess Athena—the founder and protector of Athens.
This is reminiscent of the goddess of Uruk, Inanna and, once again, we see
the similarities and consecutiveness between civilizations. Other parts of
the cities included the agora (the town’s civic and market center), theatre,
stoa (a covered walkway), and arenas. The Greek cities attained more
advanced institutional structures than those of the other civilizations. There
were many palaces—some with, others without, the city having walled
fortifications. These structures are reminiscent of those of the Hittites but
they were more advanced and could accommodate bigger crowds.

Greek literature developed far beyond anything the world had seen
before. It may even be the greatest recorded literary culture of all times.
Theatre lived through its most revolutionary phase. The many historical
works of art included written legends and tragedies. Often important events
were the subject of the plays—heralding the formation of cinema. The
remnants of the magnificent buildings indicate how highly developed the
architecture was. Sculpture attained a level of near perfection. Impressive
reliefs reflected scenes from mythology. Their strong mythological
literature was a synthesis of all the mythologies of the ancient civilizations.

Music progressed in terms of variety of instruments as well as in
variety of themes—ballads of the divine and the profane, of love and
legend. The lyre was the outstanding instrument of this period. Poetic
expression, although no longer as prominent as in the heroic era,
continued its existence.

Thearts of navigation and trade progressed as well. As far as navigation
is concerned, the Athenians were second only to the Phoenicians.

155

 
Manifesto for a Democratic Civilization

Although trade was not a favorite occupation in Athenian society, the
early seeds of capitalism existed there—albeit at a marginal level.

After Athens, Sparta was the most important of the Greek city-states. Its
most important characteristic was that it continued the ancient traditions
of the kingdoms. Although there always were rivalry and war amongst
the Greek city-states, Athens and Sparta became the models for the entire
Continental Greece, the Peninsula, the islands and Asia Minor. Even
the regions around the Black Sea and the shores of Marmara made the
transition to the city-state. The increase in population and trade initiated
an advanced era of new colonization. On nearly all the Mediterranean |
shores and islands Greek colonies were established—in Egypt we can still
see the remnants of Greek cities of this time. Trade houses were established |
from Marseille to the south of France and on the Mediterranean shores of
Spain. Even the south of Italy was colonized to a degree. Despite all these
major developments, the Greeks were not able to attain the imperial power
of the Persians or the Romans. The spirit of the time demanded becoming
an empire or being swallowed up by another empire. Around 340 BCE the
Greek civilization, led by Athens, faced the threat posed by the Macedonians,
who had risen as a new kingdom in the north. The Greek civilization was
not able to transform its extraordinary ideological and material power
into a central political system surpassing that of the city-states. After a few 1
battles of resistance, the Greek civilization lost its independence once and
for all. But, just like Babylonia, it continued its existence for a long time as
the new cultural center. The final blow to the democracy of Athens came
from Macedonia when Philip, who wished to unite in a tight alliance all the
tribes that, although from different language groups, belonged to the Greek
culture, succeeded in taking Athens in 347 BCE.

Philips son Alexander was educated by Aristotle and was thus well -
equipped with knowledge of all the Greek cultural values and its mythology.
Like all other Greek politicians, Alexander was well aware of the riches of ]
the Persian Empire and it became an obsession of the Greeks to conquer

the Persians (very similar to the desire of Islam to conquer the Byzantines).
Alexander was better equipped than the rest to achieve this, partly because
his army was not the traditional army of slaves. But it should be well
understood that Alexander longed to possess not only the riches of the

156

 
Urban Civilized Society

East but also this successful culture. He moved with his voluntary military
units, organized into a new military formation called the phalanx, led by
the chiefs of those tribes that newly left barbarism behind. He conquered
everything from Egypt up to the Indus. When he mysteriously died at the
age of thirty-three, he left a conquered area much larger than that of the
Persian Empire, an area opened up for the Greek culture.

Although this area had been civilized before Alexander’s conquest,
its ideological and material base was that of the first generation, slave-
owning civilization. The Greek culture, on the other hand, had surpassed
this culture long before this time and had a promising future. Hence, it
had the ability to inculcate the area with new ideas. Just as the Sumerian
priests inculcated the Neolithic culture to form the initial classed city and
state culture, the Greek culture inculcated youth into the ancient areas
of civilization; thus, during the Hellenistic period (323 BCE to 34 BCE),
many kingdoms were established. The most important kingdoms at the
time were those of the Ptolemies in Egypt, Pergamum in Anatolia and the
Seleucid Empire in Syria and Mesopotamia. The Parthians, who formed
a new empire after the defeat of the Achaemenid Empire, tried to restore
the Persian Empire but they did not fully succeed. These approximately
three hundred years of Hellenistic culture brought the construction of
new cities and pantheons that represented a mixed culture of Greek and
Persian gods. In addition, the fact that the Greek language and culture
became the official language and culture of such a vast area led to the
formation of an important synthesis. Not only was Alexander’s life itself
a synthesis of the East and the West, but so were all the dominant cultures
of the time. History has never again witnessed such a grand synthesis of
cultures. A vivid example of this can be seen in the ruins of Antiochus’
tomb in Mount Nemrut.* This tomb is flanked by statues of the fully
syncretized deities Zeus-Oromasdes, Apollo-Mithra-Helios-Hermes and
Artagnes-Herakles-Ares, symbolizing the East-West synthesis.

What is importance for the issue at hand is not the fact that the slave-
owning society of Sumer civilized the empty regions or the Neolithic
cultures, but that a new slave-owning society, the Greek-Hellenic
civilization, which had progressed to a higher level, attempted to re-
civilize, under their new cultural domination, the whole area from India

157

 
Manifesto for a Democratic Civilization

to Rome, from the northern Black Sea to the Red Sea and from there to ‘
the Iranian Gulf. The younger and more militant representative of the
new culture that was rising in Rome would develop the same policy and
construct the biggest slave-owning empire of its time.

Defining the Roman culture is no less important than defining the
Athenian culture. One important reason is the fact that this was the
flowering period of the slave-owning society—with its fall, the slave-
owning society declined rapidly. Secondly, it was the biggest representative
of the imperial culture. No other empire in history has ever been as
glorious as the Roman Empire. Thirdly, Rome was the last and the strongest
representative of the masked god-king civilization. The Roman emperors
considered themselves both human and god, saw no need to give account
of their own actions but everybody else was forced to account to them. |
Fourthly, this was the state that introduced law and citizenship to many
other communities. Fifthly, it was this empire that developed the concepts
of world citizenship, cosmopolitanism and world religion (Catholicism).
Sixthly, the Roman Empire was the dawn and foothold of the European
civilization. Seventhly, it existed as a republic for a long time.

The city of Rome did not miraculously attain these big developments.
It obtained the latent power from the four important cultures that
preceded it. Firstly, there was the Neolithic revolutionary culture. Around
4,000 BCE this culture not only influenced the whole of Europe but also
the Italian Peninsula and the last representatives of this culture were the
Italic tribes. It is probably correct to assume that these tribes began to -
define the ethnic identity of the present day Italy around 1,000 BCE. It
can thus be said that it is this identity that would have been influenced by
the Neolithic institutions and mentalities. They are probably of European
roots. The second group that served as a channel for cultural identity was
the Etruscan civilization. This civilization with its Mesopotamian roots
was half-Neolithic, half slave-owning; they brought the Aryan language
and culture to Italy via Anatolia. They probably settled in the North of
Italy around 800 BCE and spread from there. They are the ones that
should get the honor for bringing the first scatterings of civilization to
Italy and the city of Rome. Thirdly, the Greek culture, centered in Athens,
had one of its branches as a colony in southern Italy in the early days

158

 
Urban Civilized Society

of Rome’s formation.”” Fourthly, Carthage and the colonies established
by the Phoenicians channeled the eastern Mediterranean culture of
Egyptian and Semitic origins to the Italian Peninsula.

The essence of Rome’s success lies in this mixture of all (with the
exception of the Chinese) cultures. A synthesis far superior to that of
Athens and the eastern Aegean resulted from the unity of the latent
powers inherent in these four cultures. The mythological construction of
Rome by the twins Romulus and Remus, who were abandoned by their
parents and raised by a she-wolf, is a tale that was used to explain the
origin of many similar cultures—it is an interesting way of explaining an
external source and a culture of mixed origins.

The mythological story of the construction of the Roman Empire after
the fall of Troy by Aeneas, fellow warrior of Paris, is quite instructive in
terms of its Anatolian characteristics; it is an epic expression of my own
approach. The story of construction by the priest-kings around 700 BCE
would have been suitable for the construction of any of the similar main
city-civilizations. The many conflicts with the surrounding tribal clans
explain the relationship between class and statehood in the construction
of the cities. The rivalry and battle between the Etruscan and Latin tribes
exemplifies all conflicts between a local Neolithic culture and the cultures
of a civilization that were seen as external.

Rome had the luck that it was located at the western end of all the
other civilizations, that it was on a peninsula, and that there was no strong
civilization with European roots on its northern boundaries. All of this
allowed the rise of the Roman city-state. It could have been threatened
by either the Athens-centered civilization in Greece or Carthage, the
strongest colony of the Phoenicians in North Africa, that later became an
independent city-state. But it soon became clear that the Greeks would
not become a serious threat for the Romans. The Greek civilization was
prevented from turning itself into an empire or centralized monarchy by
the continuous pressure of the Persians from the east and by the severe
rivalry between the city-states. The result was that the Greeks were soon
ruled by the Macedonian Kingdom.

Carthage was a more serious rival. Rome and Carthage were
geographically not far from each other and thus expanded into the same

159

 
Manifesto for a Democratic Civilization

regions. The fact that they both had the civilizational characteristic of

prospective domination would sooner or later have them fighting. A

century of battles finally removed the only real obstacle in the way of

Rome’s success. The biggest threat could have been Alexander, as he
identified Rome as his next target just before his death. Instead of Rome,
the Alexandrian empire could have easily become the strongest power in
the world. Alexander had all the requirements. But his early death allowed
for the rise of Rome. Except for the Parthians far to the east and the Iranian-
Sassanid Empire, from 150 BCE onward, all the ancient civilizations and
the world of the Neolithic culture lay open to Roman conquest.

Rome’s establishment of a republic in 508 BCE can be attributed to
it being an institutional continuation of Athenian democracy. Although

the new cultural basis played a role in this, the strength of the aristocracy

was the determining factor. Monarchies are usually conservative and do
not allow aristocracies to grow.
The Republic raised the self-awareness of the Roman people and gave

them the will to stand up for their own interests. The Roman Republic’s |

two assemblies (one for the aristocracy and the other for the citizens), the

consul, the development of the judiciary as a separate institution and the

institutionalization of the city guard made the democracy of Athens look

amateurish. The governance of the Republic became the main resource

for the development of the art of politics. It not only illustrates the

connection between politics and law, it also illustrates that law is indeed

negotiated and institutionalized politics. As a republic, Rome attained

a splendid cultural development internally and glorious conquests

externally. Becoming a republic allowed the Roman civilization to reach

its natural potential. The transition from republic to empire was the result
of growing conflicts and of both internal and external threats. The conflict
between Julius Caesar and his rivals can be viewed as a conflict between

the center and periphery and between the aristocracy and the plebeians, j
This evaluation seems to be substantiated by the fact that Brutus justified

his treason by claiming that under Caesar, the glorious dignity of Rome
was sacrificed for the provinces, that the plebeians mostly took sides with

Caesar, that the distinguished representatives of the city aristocracy took

part in the conspiracy, and that the provinces mostly supported Caesar,

160

i

 
Urban Civilized Society

Externally, the rebellions continued and the Persians arrived at
the Euphrates. The enormity of the threat can be seen from Caesar’s
expeditions to Gaul, Britain and Germania, the rebellions in Anatolia,
the death of Crassus—the third most powerful person in Rome—
during a battle with the Persians, the rebellion of the Jews in the eastern
Mediterranean, the never ending fights in Greece and the Balkans, the
emerging attacks by the Goths, Scythians and the Huns, the looting
expeditions of the Arabic tribes at the far south and the continuing
existence of the strong monarchic remnants in Egypt. The republic’s
never ending senate discussions, rival factions’ disputes over consul
nominees, and the fact that people had become accustomed to external
looting complicated things for the republican regime when fighting off
the external threats and making historical decisions.

This formed the basis for the policies of Augustus, the great-nephew
of Julius Caesar, who led the transition from republic to empire. Rome
required policies that would bring stability on the inside and reliability
on the outside. Thanks to these policies, the glorious period of the Pax
Romana lasted until 250 CE. Thanks to Augustus’s policies, the senate
was reduced to an assembly of consultation; the institutions were no
longer administered by those elected but by those appointed; the people
were entertained every day and hence kept busy; strong security stations
were formed, reinforced by walls; and the transition to defensive wars
was made. Augustus was the first in a list of very famous emperors—the
last of the half-god and half-human kings! What is interesting is that the
Roman emperors were also becoming aware that the classical pantheon
of gods was meaningless. They could see that legitimacy could not be
obtained through the masks of gods.

~ The great turmoil following the invasions of the Franks, Alamanni,
and Goths around 250 CE and the inability to centralize the empire
signaled its disintegration and collapse. Even Zenobia, the famous queen
of Palmyra, pursued an empire encompassing what we today call Egypt,
Syria, Anatolia and Iraq. In the East first Ardashid I, the founder of the
Sassanid dynasty, and then the great emperor Shapur I, who can be seen
as equal to Augustus, defeated the Roman armies. They proceeded all
the way to the Eastern Mediterranean and the Taurus mountains. In

161

 
Manifesto for a Democratic Civilization

the meantime, the famous garrison city of Zeugma, close to today’s

Birecik, was destroyed, never to revive again.** Upper Mesopotamia
became a region of battle and continuously changed hands between the
Roman Empire and the two Persian Iranian Empires of the Parths and
the Sassanids. It thus became a region that was no longer a source of
civilizations, but a region of destruction. After Urartu, this region has
never been able to procure its own central formation. It is one of the
most tragic developments of history that it has always been subjected to
incursion, occupation, annexation and exploitation by other forces. It is
like the fate suffered by women: although she has achieved the biggest
cultural revolution, she has been violated the most.

The end of the era of the big Roman emperors arrived with Emperor
Julian’s tragic death during a fierce battle at the shores of the Tigris in 363.
It was clear from these battles in the East and on the European continent
that the empire could not be ruled from Rome. After the abdication of
the famous Emperor Diocletian in 305 CE, six other emperors ruled
simultaneously. Constantine I rose above the rest and changed the
religion of the empire in 313 and moved its capital in 325. After the
death of Julian, the last emperor in Constantine’s line, the empire was
officially split in 395. The Western Roman emperors were at the mercy of
the Gothic chiefs. Even the chief of the Huns, Attila, could have invaded
Rome in 451 if he had wished. In 476 the last Roman Empire was killed
by King Odoacer of the Goths. But its culture lied beneath the earth,
alive, waiting to resurface.

Although the story of the Second Rome, Byzantium, continued
for a long time, this story was both insignificant and an imitation. The
efforts of Justinian between 527 and 565 to hold together all the regions
of the empire were effective but the provinces were all slowly detaching
themselves. Byzantium defined itself as the Second Rome, but I think
the claim that Constantinople is the Second Rome is an exaggeration.
Constantinople was just an ineffective replication of the old Rome. Its
Christian aspects will be handled under another topic. The Ottomans
(and also the Moscow-centered Russian Slavs) like to see themselves as
the Third Age of Rome. Their claim to be the third Rome is not only an
exaggeration, it also leads to great confusion because it mixes different

162

 
Urban Civilized Society

periods and cultures. I will try to interpret problematic concepts such as
the Christian civilization, Islamic civilization and Hebrew civilization in
the following section.

From England to the Black Sea, many new empires appeared after
the fall of Rome. With the collapse of the belief in paganism there was an
enormous religious vacuum. European paganism and mythology could
not provide what was needed. The new age not only demanded a material,
political and economic revolution, but one that was moral and religious.

But before I discuss the rise and meaning of the Christian and Islamic
revolutions, I must give a rough overview of the cultural and monetary
situation of Rome. '

Under the imperial umbrella, agricultural production, mining,
craftsmanship and trade grew considerably. The saying “All roads lead to
Rome” signifies where the economic resources flowed. The whole world
was nurturing Rome. Besides keeping Rome, these revenues built other
magnificent cities. In the east, Hellenistic cities such as Antioch (Antakya),
Alexandria, Pergamum (Bergama), Palmyra, Samosata, Edessa (Urfa),
Amida (Diyarbakir), Erzen-i Rum (Erzurum), Kaisariyah (Caesarea,
Kayseri), Tarsus and Trapezus flourished. The European architecture
did not vary much from the Greek city architecture, but buildings were
larger and even more magnificent. Splendid aqueducts, waterwheels and
channels were built—a tremendous improvement on previous structures.
The road network was enlarged enormously. Security was ensured—
the Pax Romana really existed. Mines and architectural tools were also
improved. Quarry works and stone carvings were incomparable, except for
that of Egypt. Metallic armor coating and weapons were the products of a
highly developed craftsmanship. Trade became totally institutionalized. In
contrast to the Greek culture, under the Romans trade gained in reputation
and was in high demand. It was a flowering period for trade.

Never before in history was law so developed and institutionalized.
A natural result of law is the institution of strong citizenship. Being a
Roman citizen was a great privilege. All of the aristocracy and merchants
considered it a privilege to be a Roman citizen. Somewhat similar to
today’s obsession with life in the states of capitalist modernity, the Roman
life style was desired by everyone.

163

 
Manifesto for a Democratic Civilization

Pantheons and the temples built in the name of gods lost most of their
importance. Roman theology embraced the Greek theology but changed
the names of the gods. Virgil used the poetry of Homer—especially the
epic poems the Odyssey and Iliad—as a model to write the Aeneid, the
epic poem about the establishment of Rome. All elements of the Greek
culture, including Greek literature, theatre, history and philosophy were
Latinized and embraced. Still, important original work was produced
in Rome as well. Oratory was an important form of art and the Roman
language became the standard to which people aspired. Latin gradually
became the standard diplomatic and international official language,
replacing Greek. If the classical work of the Greeks had not been
translated to Latin, they would have been lost by now. Although clothing
still showed Eastern influences, it acquired a unique Roman style.

However, some Roman sporting events were quite ‘barbaric. The
gladiator fights, the fights with lions and other wild animals, the offering
of imprisoned people to hungry lions—these practices were appalling.
A decline in morals was achieved by accustoming people to such
entertainment.

When comparing the Roman and Athenian cultures, it can be seen
that the ideological aspect dominated the Athenian culture, whereas the
Roman culture was dominated by its material and political aspects—in
Rome, politics was turned into a form of art. However, it is irﬁportant
to see that the two cultures form a unit. It is as if Alexander first,
then the kings of the Hellenistic period, and then later the Romans,
harvested the cultural foundations that Athens sowed. It is impossible
to think of Rome becoming a world empire without cherishing the
Athenian culture. But what is more important is that these two cultures
represent the final evolution of the Eastern culture. Despite contrary
belief, it is not a culture or an empire of pure Athenian and Roman
origin. They are syntheses resulting from local elements being nurtured
by Eastern cultural sources. Even Europe was able to achieve its own
cultural revolution by the re-fusion of these cultural sources with that
of the Roman and Athenian synthesis. Without the East and the main
cradles, Mesopotamia and Egypt, one cannot even imagine a European
culture. If developments are considered from a material point of view,

164

 
Urban Civilized Society

it will be seen that history is a whole. The formation and multiplication
of cities are connected like a chain, beginning in Uruk. It is not a
coincidence that nearly all civilizations have an Uruk of their own. It
is the dialectic of urbanization. The same dialectic was present at the
birth and expansion of the Neolithic culture. Thus, this discussion of
the expansion of civilization illustrates that no societal development
can be understood if we study the society detached from its historical
and geographical contexts.

With the Romans, the conquest of our world by the systems of
civilization was largely completed. Indeed, it had even entered the vicious
circle of re-conquering the old regions. The act of re-conquering between
civilizations has the characteristic of seizure and looting, because the
civilizations share similar characteristics. The only purpose is to loot
the accumulated property income and to appropriate it for yourself.*
Expansion based on clashes and change of hands between civilizations
does not create new values but damages them.

When the monotheist religions are discussed, it will be seen that
one of the most meahingful developments in history is their opposition
to the regimes of civilization, which were polytheist and pagan, on
the basis of a new mentality and new practices. Although some of the
civilizations expanded on the basis of these religions, it is clear we face a
new development. I will try to interpret these in the next section.

Stages of Civilized Society and Problems Associated with Resistance

When Rome collapsed toward the end of the fourth century, it was not
just a city and civilization that collapsed—the longest period for all
the civilizations of antiquity and the classical age ended. The following
centuries, also remembered as the Dark Ages, are customarily called the
Middle Ages due to the way history has been classified. This classification
does not add value to our understanding of history—on the contrary, it
spoils it. In the Marxist historical perspective, due to its classificatory
method of history, this period is also called the Feudal Period. But calling
it “feudalist” does not explain the full significance of this era. It can even
be said that it serves to confound our understanding,

165

 
Manifesto for a Democratic Civilization

It may be more meaningful to interpret the disintegration of Rome
as the disintegration of antiquity and the classical age. The fact that
Christianity took the Bible, whose roots can be traced back to the
Sumerian and Egyptian periods, as its manifesto, can only be viewed as
this era’s expression of unity in opposition to civilization.

[ believe that the period after the fall of Rome requires a different
interpretation. We can label this new period the “Dark Ages,’ the
“Radiant Christian Age” or the “Radiant Muslim Age,” but these labels
do not explain what happened—they actually distort the significance
of this era. Throughout my analysis of civilization, I have pointed out
the importance of the construction done by the priests. When they had
served their purpose, those who had the political and military power
ended the rule of the priests and left their own, overwhelming mark on
all phases of civilization. For me, the most important theme is the conflict
between the civilizational culture as a whole and the Neolithic culture.
The former has continuously tried to constrict, colonize, assimilate and
eliminate the Neolithic culture. I believe that the conflict between the
cultures goes beyond the narrow class struggles and is more important
than class struggle. Class struggle should be seen as a part of this conflict.
Conflict between civilizations has always been a “bloody slaughterhouse.”

I think it will be more instructive to interpret all these struggles together
in terms of the following two concepts: ideological culture and material
culture. Fernand Braudel’s description of the capitalist culture as “material
culture” is important, and I would argue that this expression should not be
used for capitalist civilization alone, but for all the classed, city, and state
civilizations, as this might increase our chances of meaningful analysis.*"
The distinction between material culture and moral culture has always
been present, from the establishment phases of civilization to the era of
capitalism—capitalism only represents the latest phase and the peak of
material culture. So, ideological culture (or moral, immaterial culture),
which has also existed since the beginning, must now reach its peak with
the sociology of freedom and its science of knowledge. Developing our
investigation in this direction will improve our understanding of the
relationship between the material and the ideological cultures of both
the civilization and of the resistance to it—a resistance that has existed

166

 
Urban Civilized Society

throughout the history of civilization. It will also help to establish the
connection between the “Middle Ages” and “capitalist modernity” with
the sociology of freedom, and to prepare a strong basis for the evaluation
of the meaning of free life in terms of ideological culture.

The comments below should be seen as an experimental attempt
to set out the sociology of freedom of the Neolithic and civilizational
cultures. At a later stage, once I have made my observations regarding
capitalist civilization, I will present a more comprehensive analysis.

a. ldeological and material cultures in Neolithic society

It seems that the coexistence of the ideological and material cultures in
Neolithic society posed no serious problems as long as the two could
be clearly differentiated. The problems began when the two cultures
conjoined, as if in a bottleneck, and the Neolithic culture could not adapt
as civilized society started to develop.

At this point, I must explain in more detail what I mean by the term
problem that I so often use in my subheadings. As I use it, it denotes the
chaotic situation when the ideological and material cultures can no longer
be sustained by the individual and society. To resolve these problems,
the new society must achieve meaningful structures. Ideological culture
refers to the function, meaning, and mentality of the institutions and
structures, whereas material culture refers to the visual aspects of the
function and meaning of these institutions, as explained above.

Viewed in these terms, it appears there was no friction between the
ideological and material cultures of the Neolithic society that would
have threatened its existence or caused conflict, especially during its
establishment and institutionalization phases. Social morality did
not provide an opportunity for this to happen. Private property, the
fundamental factor thatleads to social cracks, did not have the opportunity
to develop for two reasons: Division of labor between sexes had not yet
led to the development of possessive and coercive relations. Because food
was obtained collectively, there were no private property rights related to
food. All communities—that had not yet grown in numbers or in size—
had a firm, common ideological and material culture. Private property
and coercion were seen as life-threatening, since it would have ruined the

167

 
Manifesto for a Democratic Civilization

structure of society. Sharing and solidarity amongst themselves were the
fundamental principle of their morality—a morality that sustained the
society. It seems that as a result of this principle, the inner structure of the
Neolithic society was quite strong. We can assume that this principle was
the reason why Neolithic society lasted for thousands of years. Regarding
the relationship between society and nature, specifically in comparison
with the civilized society, both the ideological and material cultures seem
to have been in harmony with nature. They saw nature as filled with
sacredness and divinity, and nature was believed to be as alive as they
were themselves. It was considered the strongest element of divinity as it
provided them with air, water, fire and all varieties of plants and animals.
One of the strongest reasons for the development of the notions of god
and divinity can be found in this reality.

I will elaborate on civilized society’s concept of god later, but for now
it is important to note that for Neolithic society divinity had nothing to
do with coercion, exploitation, or tyranny. It had more to do with mercy,
gratitude, abundance, affection, excitement and, when things went wrong,
fear and light. It was important to be in harmony with nature. They even
went to the extreme of sacrificing their children. The social aspect of
their reverence for the divine can be seen as an expression of the society’s
ancestral existence, through concepts such as totem, taboo and meaning.
This social aspect was partly expressed as the ancestral mother-goddess
religion. Although sacredness and concepts such as totem, taboo and
meaning didn’t exactly mean “divinity,” they always had a prominent place |
in the mindset of Neolithic society. Attributing the quality of sacredness to
an object or being is, essentially, the showing of submission or exultation,
sometimes of fear or concern, at times affection and respect, and at times
even pain and lamentation in reaction to everything that has an effect on
people’s lives. This is the value people give to the effects of objects and
the meanings they have on their lives. We can also describe this value as
morals. Indeed, the gods and sacred beings play a fundamental role in
forming such communities’ morals as they sincerely believe that this is
how their society is sustained. They believe that if any of the rules were
violated or disrespected, or a sacrifice not offered, disaster would follow.
Such communities are completely moral societies,

168

 
Manifesto for a Democratic Civilization

When did the Neolithic society enter its bottleneck or reached the
point where it desired to transcend the society of collective life? We can
establish possible internal and external factors that led to this point. It is
possible that the male acquired the strength to threaten the matrilineal
order by overcoming his weak position and attaining a stronger
status through successful hunting and the gathering of subordinates.
Agriculture and animal husbandry could have also given him the
required strength. However, our observations suggest that Neolithic
society was dissolved largely due to external factors. Undoubtedly, the
most important external factor was the priest’s sacred state-society. The
oldest stories of the civilized society of Lower Mesopotamia and the Nile
largely confirm this. As previously explained, the culture of the Neolithic
society and the new artificial irrigation techniques led to surplus
production, a prerequisite for the development of the new society. The
new society, which became urbanized around this surplus production,
organized itself as a city-state and its character changed as male power
rose. The increase in urbanization meant commodification. This, in turn,
led to the development of trade. Trade, on the other hand, infiltrated into
the Neolithic society through colonies and accelerated the disintegration
of the Neolithic society by causing commodification, exchange value,
and ownership to become widespread. The Uruk, Ur and Assur colonies
are clear evidence of this. The main region of the Neolithic (the Mid and
Upper Euphrates and Tigris river basins) joined the civilization society
on this basis. All the other clan communities that had or had not reached
the Neolithic level, faced civilized society’s attacks, occupation, invasion,
colonialism, assimilation and annihilation.

My observations lead me to believe that developments such as these
were experienced in all regions inhabited by human communities. The
Neolithic society (and similar societal forms from different periods)
which we can regard as the stem cell of society, started to disintegrate
as a result of civilized society’s attacks, but has continued to maintain
remnants of its previous existence until today. My personal view is that
the societies that preceded civilization can never be annihilated. This is
not because they were exceptionally strong but, just as with stem cells,
because social existence is not possible without them. Civilized society

170

 
Urban Civilized Society

can only exist in co-existence with the society that preceded it. (A
paradoxical situation similar to the one that there can be no capitalism
if there are no workers.) Furthermore, maintaining civilized society is
only possible if it is based on uncivilized or partially civilized societies.
It is possible that partial annihilation and elimination of pre-civilized
societies did occur, but they could not have been complete.

We should not belittle the ideological culture of Neolithic society
that existed for such a long time. Timeless values such as maternal laws,
social solidarity, fraternity, affection, respect, doing good not for personal
gain but for the good of the community, morality, voluntarily helping
one another, devotion to the undistorted essence of what is sacred and
divine, respect for the neighbors, and the desire for equality and free life
were the fundamental reasons why this society existed for such a long
time. Furthermore, these values will not cease to exist as long as social life
continues to exist. Since the values of civilized society are burdened with
unnecessary material and moral cultural elements—such as oppression,
exploitation, seizure, looting, rape, massacre, immorality, annihilation and
dissolution—their existence within society is temporary. They are mainly
the features of a society with problems. In The Sociology of Freedom, 1 will
investigate how the unsound and distorted values of civilized society can
be transcended and how the permanent values of society can become an
integral part of a free, equal, and democratic society.*

b. Material and ideological cultures in civilized society

It may be instructive to interpret the civilized society as having three
phases: he initial or constructing phase, the middle or maturity phase,
and the final phase. However, one should keep in mind that civilized
society is a whole and, although such divisions may be handy for analyses,
in the long term, it will preserve its wholeness.

Attributes such as refinement, politeness, genteelness, respect for
rules, moderation, systematic thinking, intelligence, devotion to rights
and peacefulness are ascribed to civilized society. However, these are
fabrications with only propagandistic value. The real face of civilized
society is one of violence, lies, deception, vulgarity, conspiracy, wars,
enslavement, annihilation, servitude, treachery, seizure, looting,

A

 
Manifesto for a Democratic Civilization

immorality, disrespect for the law, adoration of power, distortion and
abuse of what is sacred and divine—all for the benefit of a rapist and
gender discriminatory elite. It is a society where some have access to
everything while others are hungry and poor. The result is that society is
brimming with slaves, strayed villagers and unemployed workers. With
the might of propaganda and a false, harmful metaphysical approach, it
endeavors to continuously hide its real self.

We can define civilized society as the society ruled by an organization
called the state, which is based on urbanization and class division.
Kinship and solidarity in ethnic and tribal structures will at most lead
to hierarchy as a form of social diversification—class division and
attainment of statehood are not compatible with its nature, and tribal
culture is not compatible with the culture of classed-state. The essence
of class division is for one class to have the surplus product at their
disposal. It is also the seizure or possession of the land and production
tools that lead to surplus production. The common saying that property
is theft from society holds true; surplus production is of course the
return on that theft. The state organization is, at its heart, the collective
means of protection of this stolen property and the distribution of the -
total surplus product to its owners. Organized property is actually the
ownership of surplus production and surplus value. Of course there
was always a need for tremendous armies, bureaucracies and weapons.
And, as the society needed to establish itself, there was an enormous
need for the tools of legitimization. Thus, they had to invent a science, -
utopia, philosophy, art, law, morals and religion that would bind society -
to themselves. Meaningless metaphysics has distorted the social roles of -
these institutions and the society’s links to free life.

The relationships between civilized society and the ideological and
material cultures are rife with complexities and distortions, but of crucial
importance is the structuredness of this society. This characteristic, in
turn, increases the extent of the material culture. I am not saying that
ideological culture ceases to exist at this point but that it becomes
secondary and distorted. |

This issue needs to be understood. Now, structure and functionality
are two concepts from epistemology, the science of knowledge. Each

1n

 
Urban Civilized Society

structure has a function and each function has a structure. When in a
state of chaos, both the structure and the function enter a crisis and face
disintegration and dissolution. At this point, temporary, mixed structures
and contradictory functions step in. This is a universal phenomenon.

Every organic and every inorganic form in the universe contains
inherent structure and functionality. In general, if matter is structured,
then, in order to sustain this structure, there is a need for energy. For matter,
energy is functionality. As we know from science, energy is fundamental
and material structures cannot exist without energy—but energy can
exist without material structure. Matter as a structure can cease to exist,
but energy cannot be destroyed. As far as we know, for energy to develop
its functionality material structure is needed. Even the phenomenon of
life is linked to highly developed material structures and environments.
Aliveness without material structure is inconceivable. If it does exist, then
we are not aware of it. To draw a generalization: the counterpart of highly
developed material structures is highly developed functionality.

The societal equivalent of material structure and functionality is material
and ideological culture. Although the material structure in civilized society
is excessively developed, it has not fully developed its functionality. On
the contrary material structure has lost its functionality and in return it
has also ruined its own structures. The fundamental reason for this is that
civilized society does not abide by the main structural and ideological
cultures that enable sociality. In fact, it places too big a strain on them. Had
the development of the material culture been equivalent to and consistent
with the development of the ideological culture, we would not have been
talking about the drawbacks of material culture and its damage to society.
All that could have been said would have been that it was normal. However,
in cases where the material culture is developed and accumulated in the
hands of an elite social group, it means, in a broad sense, a structural and
functional deterioration of society and, in a narrow sense, expansion of the
material culture and dissolution of the ideological culture.

Let me explain this with an example. The Egyptian Pyramids are very
large material structures. But their counterpart is the millions of people
who lost their functionality—that is a meaningful life and freedom, i.e.
the ideological culture. This is what civilization is. It constructs huge

173

 
Manifesto for a Democratic Civilization

structures (temples, cities, walls, bridges, fields, depots) and through
its constructions, reflects its magnitude. Such societies have been made
possible by civilization. However, when one searches for functionality
or ideological cultural value in the same society, we find that it is either
absent or we find a distorted version. An elite had broken away from
society and gained control over society through merciless oppression
and exploitation. It had either torn society away from its ideological
culture or had presented a distorted version that deprived society of its
fundamental values of ideological culture.

The ideological and material cultures that nourish the minority
result in an unsound society—a society suffocating in matter and totally
detached from an ideology of free life and concern with ecology. This is
what T mean by the state of “social problems”—a state that resulted from
the dialectical development described above. This is exactly why civilized
society is detached from the environment. The existence of civilized society
necessarily means a break with the environment. It is immaterial how we
define the environment and ecology (whether we describe it in broad terms
as “the unity of nature and society” or, in the most scientific terms, as “the
integration of nature and society”), but a healthy environment and ecology
needs a society that transcends the fundamental elements that constitute
civilization: class, city, and state. I am not pleading for a vulgar elimination.
The new society can only be achieved if material and ideological cultures
are balanced and consistent. The synthesis of society’s internally balanced
and harmonious material and ideological culture with that of nature will
result in free nature (or, as Murray Bookchin puts it in The Ecology of |
Freedom, “third nature”).?* This will also serve as a means to overcome the
contradiction of civilized society’s imbalance between nature and society.

Looking at the initial construction period of civilized societies from
this perspective reveals in nearly all of them a significant material culture.
The huge pyramids of Egypt, the ziggurats of Sumer, the underground city
of China, the temples of India, and the cities and temples of Latin America
clearly show the existence of the material culture. The inner meaning or
ideological culture of these places lies in the mummified bodies, statues
of gods, and the march of the statue-king and his army in the nether
world. But it is a meaning that has been severely distorted. One could

174

 
Urban Civilized Society

try to find sense in such grandeur by emphasizing the concept of I, but
it is clear that what these structures really signify is the transformation
of sociality. It is quite clear that without society—or, rather, without its
transformation—such structures cannot even be conceived. Even the act
of deifying the king is itself a work of mentality, of a mindset. But it is
a distorted mentality and one that destroys the ideological culture. It is
in vehement opposition to this mentality that the monotheist religions
were founded—even though they risked demolishing the ideological
culture. Thus, this society, which has established itself in cities and has
organized itself as classed-state, presents its grand accumulation as
material culture. In reality, its grandeur signifies a distorted mentality, a
harmful metaphysical framework, alienation from nature, subjugation of
nature, and the pretense that it possesses a creativity that can entirely be
separated from nature. This entails the distortion of ideological culture
and relegating it to a position of secondary importance.

Of course these changes were not always met with joy; naturally, they
were met with opposition. It is important to understand that the early
resistance to civilized society was a rebellion of the ideological culture
and that it was multi-dimensional. The fact that the cities were enclosed
with fortified walls as soon as they were built denotes a rebellion of the
ideological culture of ethnic groups from outside. Mythological narration,
the well-disguised expression of reality, and sacred religious texts also tell
the stories of resistance. The fierce resistance against women’s imprisonment
in the house and her subjugation to male domination is clearly reflected in
the persona of Inanna.* In-depth analyses of the personas of the creator-
god and the subject-human will show that an intense class struggle raged.
The manufacturing of the creator-god replaced the nature-god, whose
essence was destroyed. In fact, the ruling class, who had nothing to do with
creativity, declared itself the creative and masked gods. On the other hand,
the members of society who were the real creators and had a meaningful
system of sacredness and divinity were described as having been created
from the self-proclaimed gods’ excrement. This is indeed the mythical
expression of an immense class struggle.

The fall of the ideological culture is also disguised in these narratives.
The myths dealing with the early construction of civilization, especially

175

 
Manifesto for a Democratic Civilization

the proficiency of the god’s construction, can be seen as the ideological
form of the class struggle. What happened could only have been
explained through mythology. The rivalry and wars between cities
indicate an intensive social struggle. The epic poems, the arrangement
of the pantheons, the architecture of the cities, and the construction of
their tombs clearly reflect the gap between classes and between city and
the rural society. The stories of the Pharaohs and Nimrods document
the deep cleavage within society. Tribal tunes, on the other hand, tell of
despair and hardship in the face of attacks by civilized society.

The most significant resistance to civilized society that we know of
is that of the prophetic tradition. Their story starts with Adam and Eve,
the first two people. All the characteristics of this story carry the mark
of ideological culture. If viewed as the personification of civilization’s
mentality, Adam and Eve provide the clues to the initial master-servant
conflict. The dialogue between Adam and god and his relationship with 1
Eve symbolize not only the distinction between master and slave but |
also the relegation of women to secondary importance. Noah’s exodus
is reminiscent of Neolithic society’s departure to a mountainous region
beyond civilization’s reach where they attempted to reconstruct society. |
It is indeed the story of the Sumerian society and the resistance of the |
Neolithic society in an attempt to survive. Adam and Noah show that
resistance has existed since the beginning of civilization and that it
will continue as long as civilization continues to exist. The history of
dynasties is the history of the ruling class, whereas the history of the -
prophets is essentially the history of cultures, tribes, heroines and heroes
that resisted. The feature they share is their opposition to paganism.

We should of course distinguish between the paganism of civilized
society and the tribal symbols such as totems. The gods gathered in the
pantheons of civilized society all had human shape, looking like copies -
of the rulers of the specific period—in fact, they were the rulers of the
time. So, when the prophets attacked these figures, it was seen as an
attack on the ruler. And indeed it was, for at the time anti-paganism was
synonymous with being anti-state. It was an opposition to all the notions
and icons that symbolized institutionalized society. It was resistance. The |
struggle between the priests and the rulers of the political kingdoms had

176

 
Urban Civilized Society

different characteristics. It was a struggle that took place within the upper
class. It was a struggle internal to the state. The priest was essentially
the state’s clergyman: he was not concerned with society. The prophets,
on the other hand, were the spokespersons of a society that had been
excluded by the state. But, of course, since they were the ones that had
manufactured the ideological culture, the priests had some influence on
the prophets, albeit indirectly.

The unique aspect of the tradition initiated by the prophet Abraham
and institutionalized by Moses, was the courage to completely break away
from the Egyptian and Sumerian society and the willpower to construct
their own society. This was an ideological culture revolution. “Nimrod”
and “Pharaoh” are the symbolic titles given to the rulers of the two state-
societies. They had fixed characteristics and denoted total domination.
Abraham and Moses renounced this domination by announcing their own
ideological culture and mental resistance. We should not underestimate the
significance of such a declaration during such an age. Comparatively, the
declaration that another world besides the official world of the Pharaohs
and Nimrods existed is as significant as admitting the possible existence
of other worlds would be today. To this end, they had intense discussions
with their own community; thus, the prophetic resistance was a communal
movement. But above all else, it was a movement of hope. I believe that
a significant part of the strength of the modern Israel (or, at least, the
strength of its ideological culture) derives from the narratives of Abraham
and Moses. All the stories and the utopia of the Abrahamic tradition are
about the struggle and yearning for a tribal order that was prevented by
civilization. Although they had been influenced by both civilizations, they
rejected the essence of civilization and their aim was not to build a similar
civilization. This ideal played an important part in the conflict between the
p'rophets and the priests of the kings of Israel. (I believe the strong discord
that exists today between the Israeli state and society is a continuation of
this ancient conflict.) The Hebrews and the prophets were the historical
witnesses of the Hittites, Mitannis, Assyrians, Medo-Persians and finally
the Greco-Romans and the residuals of these civilizations had accumulated
in their memories. The period between 1,600 and 1,200 BCE was a golden
period for the material culture. The relationship between the Hittites,

177

 
Manifesto for a Democratic Civilization

Egyptians and Mitannis presents us with the initial examples of international
diplomacy. The Hebrews followed these developments from close by. Thus,
we will not understand Abraham and Moses, nor any of the other prophets,
if we attempt to analyze them without taking the developments of that
period into consideration. Their response to these developments was that of
ideological culture. I will later discuss the role of Jesus and Mohammed, the
two major reformers within this tradition, in the rise of ideological culture.

Babylonia and Assur are the two important links in connecting the
rise of material culture. In the time of these two kingdoms, the enlarged
city and trade developed significantly. Babylonia was what Paris is today.
The Assyrians were the most brutal representatives of the merchant-
kingdom and, later, the empire. This is the management tradition that
best represents the material society in the Middle East. They played no
small part in reducing the ideological culture to secondary importance
and in distorting it.

The Zoroastrian culture, which the Medo-Persian tradition is
based on, waged an important struggle to regain the dominance of the
ideological culture. Zoroaster, Buddha and Socrates, who lived at more
or less the same time, were great moral philosophers and sages who
represented the superiority of ideological culture over that of material
culture. They provided the great stimulus and voice of human conscience
that had been degraded by civilization. Through their own life styles they
were able to show, at a time when material culture had a vastly superior
position, that another world was possible and that they were seeking
it. During this time, the resistance and offensive of peripheral cultures, |
primarily the Scythians, provide ongoing evidence that ideological |
culture cannot be destroyed that easily.

During the initial phase of civilization, the Semitic culture of the
Amorites, the Aryan culture of the Hurrites, and the north Caucasian
culture of the Scythians all resisted civilization. We cannot wish for clearer |
evidence that resistance to civilization has been as sustained and as strong
as civilization itself. What the Goths meant to Rome, the Amorites-Arabs,
Hurrites-Medes, and Scythians meant to the Middle Eastern empires. And,
like Christianity later, religious movements have always played a significant
part in the social resistances of the Middle East.

178

 
Urban Civilized Society

¢. Greco-Roman civilization

The Greco-Roman civilized society represents the middle or maturity
phase in civilization’s history. It can also be called the civilization of the
Classical Age. They developed the best of civilization’s potential and the
most magnificent age of material culture. This civilization managed most
successfully to synthesize the material cultures of all its predecessors.
It was the apogee of this civilization; it was also the last of its kind.
(Finding anything today comparable to the material culture that they
attained is quite difficult—capitalist industrialism is not a civilization
but a disease attacking civilization.) The Athenian period also meant the
end of antiquity’s ideological culture. The Athenian pantheon was like
a graveyard for the gods who had lost their aliveness, or, indeed, their
ideological cultural worth; the birth of philosophy was the end result
of this process. It is understandable that such a situation arises when
societies are at their peak—all peaks end in decline.

It is clear that a slave-owning society amounts to a system of a
completely material culture. The primary characteristic of this system is
the profound degradation of humanity, a degradation not seen in any
other species. This capacity for the collapse of conscience is closely linked
to the attractiveness and magnificence of the material culture. Even
today, it is nearly impossible not to be filled with awe and admiration for
the monuments and structures created by this culture. This is the closest
the human being can get to being divine. However, when divinity targets
humans themselves, it turns into a catastrophe. For the gods everyone
else is servant. None of the other contradictions and struggles was so
openly displayed as that of the god and the servant. The degradation can
be best understood if the pederasty in ancient Greek culture is analyzed
properly. Its connection to the enslavement of women goes deeper than
just that of sexuality; in essence, the enslavement of women and the
sexual bondage of boys are the same social phenomenon.

Two of the most striking features of woman’s enslavement are the
oppression and dehumanization. Being confined to the house is not just
spatial imprisonment. It is worse than being in a prison: it is being kept
in a state of continuous and profound rape. No matter how hard one tries
to disguise this reality with engagement and wedding ceremonies, even

179

 
Manifesto for a Democratic Civilization

one day of a practice of this kind signals the end of humanity’s honor,
especially for those who have self-respect. With the rise of male dominated
society, woman was systematically removed from the values of production,
education, administration and freedom through various forms of violence.
Her violation through ideological degradation—including appraisals
of love—was so extreme that the result was worse than submission. She
completely lost her identity and was recreated as something else: a wife.
Even in the eyes of an ordinary man a woman could be nothing but a wife.
And her being a wife permitted the rise of all sorts of disposition rights—
including murder. She was not just property but private property. For her
owner, it denoted the potential of being a small emperor—as long as he
knew how to make use of it! The principle pillar that prepared the ground for
civilization was this very reality. This reality is also one of the main reasons
why the material culture has no boundaries. The success of the experiment
with women meant that it could be tried on the whole of society—this was
the second, grave infliction. Society was to function as wife to its master. As

I will argue later, the process of housewifization of society was completed by
the capitalist system. However, the foundation for this had been laid during
the initial phase of civilization, and during the Greco-Roman period there |
was an attempt to attain the housewifization by presenting pederasty as an |
example of a successful society. Society can only be turned into a wife if
man too were turned into a wife. The Greco-Roman society realized this
and took its own precautions. It was widely accepted that the situation of
a slave was much worse than that of a wife. The problem was to turn those
men who were not slaves into wives. The Greeks’ solution was pederasty. I
am not referring to homosexuality—a phenomenon that has biological and
psychological dimensions. In ancient Greek society it was fashionable for |
every free adolescent boy to have an adult man as a partner. The boy had to
be the lover of his partner at least until he was experienced. Even the great
sage Socrates took part in this practice. What was important was not how
much one took advantage of the boy, but that the boy had to learn the soul of
submission. The mentality underlying this practice is clear. Since attributes |
such as freedom and honor are incompatible with an enslaved society, they
must be wiped from society’s memory. And indeed, in an environment
of human freedom and honor, enslavement cannot flourish. The system

180

 
Urban Civilized Society

understood this and strove to implement the required mental attitude.
However the Greco-Roman culture was prevented from completing this
mission. Internally, Christianity developed through free philosophical
schools and externally the continuous offensives and rebellions of the
different ethnic groups presented other problems for society. At the same
time, there were indications that material culture did not have the strength
to overcome everything. Later, however, society would be turned into a wife
without the need for pederasty.

Essentially, the resistance of tribal forces and the Christians—paying
a painful price in the process—was to end this type of society that meant
the destruction of humanity. Their later reconciliation with the system
does not negate the value and aim of the ideological culture of these
resistance movements. These movements had no significance in terms of
material culture, and their later advances should be seen as the rise of the
ideological culture. A similar example would be the relationship between
the Sassanids, Islam, and the migrating Turanians. The profoundness of the
rise and fall of societies cannot be explained simply in terms of oppression
and exploitation; it is vastly more comprehensive. Capitalism has not yet
been resolved and dissolved because we have not been able to make an
appropriate analysis of civilized society. The analyses of capitalism that
have been done are like the small part of the iceberg above the water. The
essential bulk is the civilized society and that is still below the water.

d. Christianity and Islam

Itis not clear whether Christianity and Islam should be seen as civilizations
or as moral systems (Christian and Islamic theologians and believers are
themselves not clear about this). Although there is no easy answer to
this question, it remains an important one. But even if they started off
as belief and moral systems, it has not been explored sufficiently where
and until when they remained like that, what their relationships with the
civilized and the excluded societies were, and to what degree they formed
or opposed civilizations.

In my opinion, these two important belief and moral systems, formed
during the Sassanid and Greco-Roman empires, represent a great offensive
by the ideological culture against the deterioration of ideological culture,

181

 
Manifesto for a Democratic Civilization

and against the vast proportions that the material culture had reached.
If the intention was to construct a new civilized society, they would
have based themselves on city and class formations, as happened in the
construction of all classic civilizations. To the extent that they intended
to established cities and classes, this was only because they wanted
everyone to adopt their belief and moral values and not because they
wished to become civilized societies themselves. Their most important
objective was not to achieve power or to take possession of the material
culture. On the contrary, they wished to attain the hegemony of a new
ideological culture that would protect humanity against a meaningless
material culture that was no longer on equal footing with ideological
culture. Therefore, simply defining the age of Christianity and Islam as
civilized systems is insufficient and may lead to misconceptions.

The collapse of Rome was not an ordinary event nor was it the
collapse of an ordinary civilization. Indeed, with its collapse a tradition
of civilized society at least four thousand years old also collapsed. The
details of the internal and external reasons for its collapse do not concern
us here. What does concern us is whether or not there was a connection
between the values of civilized society and the general collapse, and if so,
what role these values played in the collapse.

Rome can be seen as representative of all the initial and classical
civilizations (with the exception of China). Not only because it too
institutionalized slavery, but because it shared all the material and moral
cultures of these civilizations. The fundamental reason for our inability
to understand this reality is because these societies are analyzed on the
basis of their daily oppression and exploitation. This flawed approach
is one of the most significant distortions caused by positivism—the
school of thought that, arguably, underlies the most pernicious aspects of
European thinking. If a society is not analyzed on the basis of its material
and ideological cultures, the conflicts and contradictions, the harmony or
incompatibility between these two cultures of the society, a meaningful
interpretation cannot be reached. Consequently, new paradigms for a
freer life cannot be constructed.

It should now be clear that the collapse of Rome also meant the collapse
of the preponderant material culture of civilized society and its ideological

182

 
Urban Civilized Society

culture, an ideological culture that had no bearing on a meaningful life.
Even Romes architecture was the crowning of a four thousand year
old architectural tradition, which included that of Egypt. The Roman
pantheon was the final, most magnificent, stage of the top level of the
four thousand year old Sumerian priests’ ziggurats. Thus, the material and
ideological cultures that concomitantly collapsed with Rome were at least
four thousand years old. Similarly, an analysis of how and by whom this
demolition was brought about indicates a history of resistance that forms
one continuous whole. The history of external resistance to and attacks
on civilization, starting with the early Amorites and Hurrites and ending,
finally, with the Goths, dates back four thousand years. The long history of
internal resistance began with Noah and continued until Mohammed. The
story of every prophet indicates the length to which they went to gather the
communities around them. What is important is not only that the history
of resistance stretched over millennia, but also the vast area over which it
occurred. From the Arabian deserts to the Taurus and Zagros skirts, from
the Central Asian deserts to the deep European forests, it left profound
marks on both the material and the moral cultures of the nomadic tribes.

The Eurocentric structures of knowledge are not interested in
investigating these matters (and this is precisely why “Eurocentric” is an
appropriate description). But, without a meaningful interpretation of the
historic civilizational sources of Rome’s material and ideological cultures,
and without the real history of Rome, we will not be able to identify the
roots of Europe’s material and ideological cultures. i

The two hundred years prior to the collapse of Rome were described
as centuries of darkness and complexities—no societal collapse is simply
a matter of the events occurring in its few final years. This also applies
to the collapse of the Sassanid Empire—the Eastern version of how the
Sumerian priest-state came to its end. Although the Zoroastrian influence
had strengthened its moral character, this influence was not strong enough
to prevent Sassanid Iran’s moral collapse. Just as Buddha could not prevent
the Rajahs from constructing civilized society based on material culture,
and as Socrates could not cure the moral decay of the Athenian culture,
50 Zoroaster could not prevent the excessive luxuries of the huge Persian
and Sassanid material cultures. History shows us that the final period

183

 
Manifesto for a Democratic Civilization

of the Iranian Sassanid Empire was no different from that of Rome. The
Turanian attacks from outside and the religious and sectarian conflicts
on the inside, slowly brought about its end. When the Mani movement,
a strong offensive of ideological culture, was eliminated around 250 CE, it
was left destitute, unable to renew itself. If not for the wars waged by Islam,
the Nasturi priests, just like the Catholic priests in the West, might have
ideologically conquered Iran. Islamic occupation prevented this.

Now that we understand what the collapse of the two big slave-
owning civilizations entails, we can define the two famous movements
that call themselves ideological alternatives: Islam and Christianity.

The constructing of an own official society in Rome led to many
marginal sections within the society. These were not traditional migrating
tribal groups with their own ethnic characteristics. They were the newly
formed group of the déclassé, the rabble, or, as the Romans put it, the
“proletariat” They did not start off as identifiable groups with their own
ideologies; rather, they were the unemployed of the slave-owning society.
For the first time in history a new social stratum was formed and gradually
new cults such as the Essenes in Roman Judaea developed around them.

We do not need to concern ourselves with the ongoing debate
whether Jesus was an historic person or a symbolic persona created by the
conditions of the time. With the'Siege of Jerusalem in 63 BCE, despite great
resistance, the small Hebrew kingdom was conquered by the Romans and
administered through governors. At the time of Jesus’s birth, Rome was at
its peak under Emperor Augustus. The Jewish upper classes had become
professional collaborators—their long history of collaboration with the
Nimrods and Pharaohs prepared them well for collaboration with Rome.
On the other hand, since the time of Abraham and Moses, the Hebrews
always had a strong leaning toward freedom. Jesus was the continuation
of this tradition. We can deduce from his last actions that Jesus had an
ideological interest in Jerusalem—the reason for his crucifixion.

Initially, Christianity was not an organized movement nor did it
have an ideological manifest. There was only a small group of followers
loosely attached to Jesus. These early leaders of Christianity, the so-called
disciples and later the apostles, had no hierarchic, ethical or official status
in society. For such a group, life in Roman Judaea could not have been

184

 
Urban Civilized Society

easy. Crucifixion, an often-used method of punishment in this region,
was but one of Rome’s terrible inventions that drove many groups deeper
into the interior or to the shores of Syria (the opposite direction of
Abrahams flight to the region where Jerusalem would later be built).

A century after Christs death the first drafts of the Bible were
compiled. One of the earliest was that of Marcion.® The early saints
within the Roman Empire surfaced in the 1st century and increased in
the 2nd and 3rd centuries. The 4th century is the century of Christianity.
After Emperor Constantine paved the way for Christianity to become
the state religion, there was a huge increase in the number of saints and
in the number of believers.”® During these centuries, Christianity began
to divide into various denominations and state Christianity developed.

A central doctrine of Christianity is that of the Trinity, the expression
of God in three personae: God the Father, God the Son, and the Holy
Spirit. Mary, the mother of Jesus, is not one of the Holy Trinity and not
seen as divine, but veneration for Mary has been high ever since the first
century, so that one could interpret the Father, the Mother and the Son
as a trinity of god figures. I am not going to embark on a theological
discussion, but I must indicate that the roots of the belief in the Divine
Family can be traced back to our earliest history. The Sumerians were the
first society to channel this belief into the ziggurats, the official temples.
The initial pantheon trilogy consisted of the goddess Inanna (the Mother),
the god An (the Father), and the god Enki (the Son). Thus, the often heard
claim that Christianity has been strongly influenced by paganism is not
something that should be brushed aside. What is of more interest to us,
is that Christ came from the Abrahamic tradition, a tradition strongly
opposed to paganism. The religious movement resisting in the name of
Christ seems to have reconciled these two traditions.

This matter has confused people over the ages and has led to
discussions, divisions, and conflicts between denominations. At the heart
of the discussion is the question whether Christ is of divine or mortal
essence. Mostly, those who accept Christ’s divine essence are those who
align themselves with official Christianity. In 325 CE, the Christian
bishops convened for the First Council of Nicaea declared that the Son
was of the same divine essence as the Father; thus, that Christ was truly

185
Manifesto for a Democratic Civilization

human, but at the same time, truly God. Constantine (the convener of the
council) himself accepted this interpretation. Thus, the state’s concept of |
divinity is the concept that has been officially accepted. Those who claim '
that Christ is only of human nature mostly were those who have not been
integrated into the state.® (A parallel can be drawn with the division
between the Sunni sect, being the state religion, and the Alevi sect, whose
members have not been integrated into the state.) The foundation for this
was laid by the Sumerian priests. The initial separation of religion based -
on two different social strata began with the Sumerians, whereas the
concept of the divinity of humans was handed down from the Neolithic ° |
culture. Or, rather, the concept carries some important remnants from
that culture (paganism too has retained some of these aspects). 4

Christianity underwent two important changes in the fourth century. .
The first was that it became a state religion. In this form it also became the i
religion of civilization. This was Rome’s attempt to overcome the moral
crisis, or the crisis of legitimacy, experienced by the Roman material
culture. The second change was that it became the religion of the masses.
It was no longer the belief of small groups of saints but the official or
unofficial religion of large numbers of peoples, amongst the Armenians,
Assyrians, Greeks, Latins, and others.

This is how we entered the infamous Middle Ages—the so-called Dark
Ages. On the one hand, based on the legitimacy of Christianity we had the
original, collapsed Rome replaced by the Rome of Constantine. On the
other hand, there was the incredible development of Christianity as a large
offensive of the ideological culture. The two main actors of this period—
Christianity of Constantine’s Rome of and the Christianity adopted by
the masses—acted according to the division around the doctrine of the
Trinity: the religion with an official god and the religion of unofficial
gods. The historical division continues, although in changed form, and
conflict between them has caused much bloodshed. The previous conflict
between Christianity and paganism has become the conflict between the
Divine Christ and the Human Christ. Ultimately, though, this division
is but the continuation of the ancient struggle between the civilizations,
various classes and ethnic forces under new conditions and masks. A
clearer interpretation of this division is that part of this new offensive

186

 
Urban Civilized Society

- of the ideological culture, with its profound historic roots, had become
part of civilization by reconciling with the material culture and therefore
corrupted. Another part had refrained from reconciliation and continued
to pursue ideological and cultural hegemony.

The thousand years after the fall of Rome (more or less from 500 CE
to 1,500 CE) can be seen as a period of rivalry, conflict, and reconciliation
between those who struggled for the supremacy of the material culture
and those who struggled for the supremacy of the ideological culture.
Calling the Middle Ages “dark” or “feudal” can only partially explain what
it was that really happened during this time. If we can answer the question
of what filled the vacuum left by Rome’s collapse, we may arrive at a
better understanding of the forces that caused the collapse of the Roman
material culture. Elements of the material culture continued in the East
in the Byzantine cities. In Europe, it reappeared in the newly constructed
cities. Indeed, the history of modern Europe’s material culture can be
attributed to this new movement of urbanization. If cities such as Paris
were mere continuations of the 4th century Roman settlements, then the
domination of the material culture around 1,500 CE would not have been
possible. Not only could the medieval cities not be compared to Rome,
they did not even surpass the Mesopotamian cities of 3,000-2,000 BCE
or the Aegean cities of 600-300 BCE. Even the medieval European castles
did not surpass the castles of Taurus and Zagros of 2,000-1,500 BCE.
In short, the urbanization of Europe between 500 and 1,500 CE could

“not have provided the necessary power to surpass the “dark” ages. But
the new moral culture, the hegemonic ideological culture of Christianity,
did have this ability. For European history, Christianity’s superiority
undoubtedly has had important consequences. Historians interpret this
period to be the conquest of Europe by the moral culture of Christian

‘belief and values rather than material culture, and I agree.

The really important question is why Rome remained at the level of a
material culture of two thousand years ago. And even more importantly,

, how was it possible for a system of beliefs and moral values such as
Christianity, which was not really in a position to satisfy the present need
for ideological culture, to conquer Europe. I believe an important reason
is the fact that Europe had only experienced the Neolithic culture at the
Manifesto for a Democratic Civilization

time and was, so to speak, virgin soil. As a result you can reap what you
sow and its one thousand year old history has proven this reality. The
second reason could be external factors: the threat of the Turks (both as
Muslims and as pagans) and of the Arabs coming from Sicily and Spain.
When seeing these two factors in combination, it is possible to understand
the long duration of the “darkness” of medieval Europe. There was a
need for Christianity because paganism collapsed with the collapse of
Rome. Even before Christianity, the belief and moral system of European
paganism had proven to be insufficient. As a result, the conditions for
the hegemony of Christianity, ideologically and culturally, were ripe.
However, its material culture had always been weak compared to that of
Rome and the East. Obviously, it was impossible to establish magnificent
cities like Paris from communities who had just left the Neolithic period.
As a result of this double incompetence (the inability of Christianity to
overcome the need for ideological culture, and the structure of cities that
had not surpassed those of thousands of years ago) it was possible for
Europe to launch its grand material offensive in the 16th century.

There is, however, a close relationship between the grand offensive of
the material culture and the hegemony of Christianity as the ideological
culture. (Indeed, the fact that major religions have always been in conflict
with sectarian splinter groups proves that this is a universal reality.)
European capitalism, as the offensive of a splendid material culture, used
the weaknesses of Christianity—such as its lack of strong ideological
content—to construct a new age by transforming the merchant and profit
cult into the new official power of civilization. No previous civilization
had dared to do this. This is how the transition from the middle stage
to the final stage of the material culture came about in the West. I will
discuss later whether this age, capitalist modernity, should be seen as the
crisis of the civilization, whether it had become a cancerous disease, or
whether it is the final stage of old age.

The story of Islam is more complicated, as Islam became rapidly
civilized and has been involved in serious conflicts with Judaism and
Christianity since its inception and, internally, with itself. I see the two
hundred years before Mohammed as the crisis of the last phase of the slave-
owning civilization. Christianity came out of this crisis as the stronger

188

 
Urban Civilized Society

side. It succeeded in becoming the first organization for the poor and un-
influential of society. It succeeded as an alternative power. Although there
are problems associated with Christianity, I shall evaluate these problems
under Islam (since they arose from the same roots). This section shall be
finalized with a look at other possible alternatives and the rise of Islam.

Before I proceed, I need to raise several points. Firstly, Islam is the
final religion in the Abrahamic tradition and this is how it constructs
itself. Hence, its roots include the Abrahamic tradition that is at least two
thousand years old. We can conclude from this that the conflict between
the Arabs and the Jews is in a way the conflict between two sects of the
same religion. Secondly, Mohammed viewed the mentality of Mecca, his
hometown, as ignorance. It is indeed a way of criticizing the paganism of
Mecca. Thirdly, Mohammed’s dialogues with the Nestorian priests could
be seen as a link to Christianity. Fourthly, his involvement with trade
is due to his being employed by the merchant Khadijah, whom he later
married. Fifthly, he was severely influenced by the tribalism that reigned
amongst Arabs for thousands of years. Sixthly, he lived during the last
magnificent stages of both the Byzantine and the Sassanid Empires.

Although these are the main factors that ensured the birth of Islam,
there are of course other factors. What I am trying to point out, once
again, is that the birth of Islam was also not a “miracle in the desert” but
the product of strong material and historical circumstances. Not only
are its strengths linked to these circumstances, but so are its weaknesses.
Islam is not a synthesis of civilizations, like early Sumer or late Rome, but
predominantly a movement of beliefs and morals.

Mohammed’s life is much better known than that of Abraham,
Moses, or Jesus. Many of his characteristics are also known. His message,
the Qurian, does not target a single nation, tribe or class but the whole
of humanity. I believe that the concept of Allah, the most used in the
Quran, should be the main topic of Islamic theology. Mohammed was
deeply influenced by this. He viewed Allah as the Lord of all worlds.
The term “Allah” is conceptually so wide that sociologically speaking it
has the capacity to integrate the divine in nature with that in society.
The ninety-nine attributes it contains define the combined effects of
the forces of society and the forces of nature. However, the issues its

189

 
Manifesto for a Democratic Civilization

followers would like to understand as “perpetual laws and orders” are
extremely unclear. This is because no attributes with social roots, which
are necessarily transitory, and not even all aspects of nature, can have the
value of a law. The concept of the immutability of law itself resulted from
the extreme formalism of Hebrew tribalism. This understanding of law
as changeless might have been useful in overcoming tribal anarchy, but
in later centuries it led to great conservatism in the Islamic society. In any
case, if we consider the rapid nature of social development, it is clear that
there are potential dangers contained in the ummah concept.”’

Mohammed’s strong belief in Allah determined his metaphysical
strength. At least, by accepting the existence of a superior power, he
escaped contracting the familiar disease of being the god. Keeping in
mind the big dispute over the divinity of Christ, Mohammed’s approach
clearly was more productive. But one of his failings was his inability to
overcome the Judaic rigorousness. The heavy bill is now being settled in
the Arab-Israeli conflict.

It is worth discussing whether Mohammed intended a society with
a predominantly material or a predominantly ideological culture. In
Christianity, the moral aspect is prevalent, but Islam appears to have
established a strong equilibrium between the material and the ideological
culture. Despite its insufficient and controversial content, I see this
equilibrium as the strongest feature of Islam. One of Mohammed’s hadiths,
“work for this world as if thou will never die and work for the afterlife as
if thou will die tomorrow;,” explains this structure well. It is known that he
was not in favor of the classical Roman, Byzantine, Sassanid or the more
ancient Pharaoh and Nimrod systems and that he vehemently criticized
them. Thus, from this perspective, he was a strong critic of civilization.
However, neither the material circumstances nor the ideological capacity
of his time sufficiently explains his ideal of a city-state. (It is similar to
the socialists of today not being able to find an alternative system to the
modern state.) But his emphasis on morals indicates that he was aware of
the problems inherent in civilized society. This made him a great reformer,
even a revolutionary: he refused to acknowledge any society where morality
was not prevalent. His rules about interest prevented the development of
the capitalist society in the Middle East. In this regard, he was ahead of

190

 
Urban Civilized Society

both Christianity and Judaism. He had well-known abolitionist tendencies,
was quite affectionate and favored freedom. Although he was by no means
desirous of equality and freedom for women, he did despise the profound
slavery of women. He recognized the differences in class and ownership
in society but, like a social democrat, he tried to prevent the forming of
monopolies and their social hegemony by using excessive taxation.

This short summary shows us that Mohammed and Islam neither
wanted an unbalanced material culture, nor wanted to remain a purely
ideological culture. It is this aspect that strengthened Islam both
against civilizational powers and against other ideological and cultural
formations. As far as I can see, no other social movement, apart from
those of the Sumerian and Egyptian priests, was able to maintain the
unity of material and ideological culture as Islam did. If radical or
political Islam is still growing strong today, we need to understand the
structural aspects of this religious movement.

It may be worthwhile to reexamine the development and changes the
material and ideological cultures went through at the end of the Roman
and Sassanid civilizations. The four thousand year old slave-owning
system had deeply damaged humanity’s conscience and morality and
created a big moral vacuum. Rome’s attempts to fill the vacuum failed, as
evidenced by its own collapse. There clearly was also a big vacuum in the
world of belief. People now realized that the gods they had been made to
believe in for the past four thousand years were not what they were said
to be. Paganism had lost the element of sacredness; the huge material
structures left a ruined humanity behind.

We could call this period a state of crisis and chaos. Continuous wars
turned the idea of peace into a mere utopian ideal. Old laws and life styles
lost their significance but there was nothing to fill the void. In the center,
the threat coming from the movements of the unemployed masses and
the vast number of abandoned slaves intensified; on the periphery, the
threat coming from the nomadic tribes was as intense. It must have felt
as if the foretold arrival of heaven and hell had dawned. All awaited a
message of salvation. And, indeed, it was an ideal setting for this message
to reverberate throughout society. Great movements had to be born; thus,
there was an urgent need for a new utopia and new programs. This time,

191

LA—————_
Manifesto for a Democratic Civilization

the structural and functional crisis of the system of slave-owning society
was irreparably deep; society could no longer be ruled through (even
newly constructed) slave-owning systems. Under circumstances like these,
the human conscience and mentality desired something new. When the
last material structures upholding the system could no longer be sustained,
the circumstances for the world religions had been prepared.

Much has been said about the feudal society that existed in the
aftermath of the old slave-owning society. It was, however, based on similar
principalities that date back to 4,000 BCE. Stronger castles had been built
around 2,000 BCE, and even at that time there were peasantry and servants
around these castles. In the event of an empire disintegrating, anyone in any
of the ethnic communities could easily have formed their own principality.
After all, the empire was the unity—the federation or confederation—of
such small states. The small states that were formed after the fall of Rome
and the Sassanids came about in the same way. The villages and the
mentality of the villagers were, in fact, not so different from the period
of Neolithic institutionalization around 6,000 BCE. Nothing had changed
in the relationship between woman and man, and nothing had changed
in the relationship between serfs and seigniors. The essence of ownership
remained unchanged and there was no revolutionary development in the
means of production. Thus, the material order that formed around the 5th
and the 6th centuries cannot really be called a new civilization.

As a matter of fact, the urban structures in Europe were not sufficient
to form a new civilization. The empires that came about in the West
were nothing but remnants of Rome. The same can be said about the
East. Calling them the remnants of the system preceding capitalism is
more meaningful; at best they can be called a revisal of the old. In other
words, we should not deny the material structures preceding capitalism.
Most probably, the period of chaos came about because in order to make
the transition to capitalism different structures than those of the slave-
owning systems were needed. The urbanization of Europe, especially
after the 10th century, heralded capitalism. Thus, we should not take
concepts such as feudalism and Dark Ages too seriously. A more realistic
interpretation is that a four thousand year old social system of masked
gods and enslavement had dissolved within the scope of the longue durée,

192

 
Urban Civilized Society

the long term. The dissolution of the Neolithic system still continues
today. Long-term systems may take hundreds of years to collapse or to be
revised. If we need to give it a name, then the period after the 5th and 6th
centuries can be called the Period of Late Systems.

So what does all this mean in terms of Islam and Christianity? Their
utopia, like all utopias, makes promises of paradise or talks about millennia
of happiness. The “promise for paradise” reminds me of the longing for an
oasis. Its opposite is an infertile life. The prophets promised hope and a
future for their communities; the quest for paradise is nothing but a promise
of a future in a new world. We can also look at it as a harbor inevitably
constructed by those who have lost hope. In this regard, Saddam Hussein’s
relationship with the Qur'an just before his execution is quite intriguing.
The Quran provides exceptional power to construct the minds of those who
have no hope left. One cannot properly understand the messages brought
by the Holy Books without understanding the conditions of slavery. Given
this and the metaphysical nature of the human, the construction of many a
utopia, including heaven (and its counterpoint hell), was inevitable. This is
what being human entails. Without striving for a better future life cannot
really be lived. And there would have been no foundation for us to base our
efforts for a better life upon.

Fear of death itself, I believe, is a social construct. In nature, death
is experienced differently from the way it is experienced in human
communities. The profound pain and grief caused by socially experienced
death result from its contrast with the reality of natural death. If there
were no death, we could not have talked about living. This is why the
most precious part of life is becoming aware of death. The alternative is
to strive for immortality.

The utopia of Islam and Christianity held an intriguing promise for
ending slavery, even though it was not clear what outcome could be
expected. The question of an alternative was evaded with the promise
of a life that would be like living in paradise. The communities at
the monasteries and madrasahs can be seen as examples of the new
society to be constructed. Madrasahs, monastries, different orders and
denominations are all attempts at construction programs for a new
society. Christianity and Islam both have pursued this goal intensely—for

193

L-*—-—————
Manifesto for a Democratic Civilization

two thousand and one thousand five hundred years respectively. On the
other hand, the heads of the Christian churches as well as the conquest
commanders of Islam easily created a late, revised slave-owning system.
These late slave-owning societies are just interim societies following the
conquest and do not represent permanent systems of living for the entire
society. Calling them Islamic and Christian civilizations would be unjust.
The aim of the utopia was not the creation of new civilizations but to
salvage life and to turn it into something beautiful.

Thus, we see that the belief and moral systems of the two religions do
not give us a consistent answer to the question as to whether or not they
were civilizations. But their role in surpassing the four thousand year old
system was significant. Although there were some revised slave-owning
regimes, principalities, city-states and empires constructed in their
names, none of these can be considered Islamic or Christian civilizations.
If they are considered thus, one must put this down to ideological
distortions. The priest cannot simply come out of the church and become
an emperor, and neither can the imam become the head of state. These
religions have always seen turning their structures and organization into
states as a wrongdoing, and have warned those clerics who use the church
to become heads of state to comply with the requirements of religion.
Not that their warnings have had any effect or ever will.

We might now be in a better position to answer the question of why
we ‘ended up with capitalist civilization. The ground for capitalism might
have been prepared, intentionally or unintentionally, by bringing the
gigantic empires (which were in the way of capitalism’s development)
to collapse and by the monotheistic systems not turning their aims and
structures into civilizational constructs. Wallerstein's argument that
empires were in contradiction with capitalism is indeed a very strong
one, whereas Max Weber clarifies this by showing how the spirit of the
Reformation paved the way for capitalism.*®

Max Weber calls the capitalist civilization “the elimination of magic
from the world”*® Of course, in a highly advanced system of material
culture a magical life cannot exist. Such alife is only possible in the world
of ideological culture. Islamic, Christian and similar cultures do not have
the skill to enchant the world of capitalist life. This can only be procured

194

 
Urban Civilized Society

by the power and skill of the sociology of freedom, which can utilize
the entire inheritance of the ideological culture. I shall discuss this point
in detail. I shall demonstrate that life itself is the most magical element
there is. Therefore, our slogan should not be Socialism, not capitalism, but
rather: Free life, not capitalism!

But could there have been a solution that did not include civilization?
The only way in which this could have been accomplished would have
been something like going back to the Neolithic society. Since the
cities could not be removed, trade also could not be prevented. The
male-dominated society could not have been abandoned. No matter
how much it was criticized, the state could not have been removed
under those circumstances. Indeed, monasteries, madrasahs, different
denominations and the Sufi way of life grew from such despair. They saw
the degenerative and damaging effect of all the mentioned classifications
above and wanted to escape them. However, their remedies could never
be anything but marginal. So, they always left the door open for the
emergence of a new civilization.

Perhaps another glimpse of the Hebrew tribe’s story will be
instructive. During the Roman and Persian-Sassanid periods, the Jews
spread throughout the known world. They were experts in matters of
trade and money. They were the spirit of the material civilization (or
rather, its filtered power). They also had a very strong tradition of literacy.
Their authors took the position of the prophets. They were the leading
proponents of a new system of civilization, i.e. capitalism. Furthermore,
they were the experts on religion and god. Their mark on the utopias
cannot be missed—the infiltration of the power of money and trade into
the new belief systems was enormous.

Christianity conquered all of Europe in its own age of ideological culture.
Its influence in Asia was limited, although traces of its influence were present
in African civilizations. Islam rapidly conquered all of Arabia, North Africa,
and Central Asia. Not only were all the old systems of civilization conquered,
new regions were added to the empires of ideological culture. However,
what happened was not an expansion of civilization. Rather, we can call
it the development of the moral world. This is exactly what Christianity
means with its “thousand year reign of peace” and Augustine with his “City

195

R i
Manifesto for a Democratic Civilization

of God”® Both the Christian and the Islamic utopias were influenced by
classical Greek philosophy (and played a role in its revival). Their roots are
partially in Aristotle and Plato, and partially in the Egyptian and Sumerian
mythology. Both have weak scientific bases and as freedom utopia, they
are unsophisticated. But the moral side of both is well developed. Let me
repeat that for a religion morality is the essential aspect, not theology.
Because morality does not lose its importance, similar moral doctrines
have retained their importance in Christianity and in Islam. Utopias are
not always faultless—they mostly serve contrary to their objectives. The
Christian and Islamic utopias served the onset of capitalism, despite their
objectives. It is also true that these utopias have been in severe conflict with
each other. In addition, in the name of Islam, limitless and unjust seizure of
land and culture took place for the benefit of barbaric and dominant tribal
aristocracies. It is often said that Islam impeded the progress of Christians
but this is a reality for all religions. Moreover, the conflict between those
elements of Islam and Christianity that became the state itself cannot be
called conflict between Islam and Christianity. These conflicts have their
origins in civilization, and religion is only used as their disguise. I shall
elaborate on these matters my forthcoming book, The Sociology of Freedom.

In conclusion, the ideological and material cultures are problematic
matters but nevertheless they are realities and a study of these cultures
is much needed. The role of the conflict between slave and master, serf
and seignior, in the making of history is both limited and indirect—the
wheels of history turn differently. It is this “different turning” that I am
investigating. I know my attempt is amateurish and unpolished, but this
work is necessary—not only so that we can understand history, but also
so that today’s problems can be resolved.

The subject matter will not be complete without an evaluation of
the other branch of resistance, the migration of peoples. In the final
stages of the slave-owning civilization, the migrating Goths and Huns in
Europe and the Arab tribes in the Middle East progressed very quickly
from resistance to taking the offensive. The migration, resistance, and
offensives of these peoples with their advanced tribal hierarchies and
their pre-civilizational patriarchal societies were very much alike to
movements of the ideological culture. Although their communities were

196

 
Urban Civilized Society

partially egalitarian and carried elements of the Neolithic culture, still,
they were in admiration of the civilization. They did not have the ability
to develop metaphysical systems that came close to that of a religion.
Mostly, they were soldiers of fortune and willing to shed their blood for
various empires. Yet, they must still be regarded as amongst the most
important history-makers. If it were not for the Germanic, Turkic,
Mongolian, Arabic, and before them the Hurrian, Amorite and Scythian
assaults, the course of history might have been different. Whilst the
Germanic peoples and Arabs destroyed both Roman Empires, the Turks
and Mongols played their role in the destruction of the Iranian as well
as the eastern Roman Empire. Afterwards, however, all the tribal chiefs
either crowned themselves or took positions in the army or bureaucracy.
The rest either formed new tribes or lived as the déclassé at the bottom of
society. Although these forces played an indisputable role in the collapse
of the slave-owning system, they were not able to present alternative
systems and to construct something new. They were able to destroy and
loot, but not to create and protect.

Final Remarks

Up to this point, this work researched how the ground was prepared for
capitalist modernity. I have tried to show which historical developments
led to the development of capitalism. One of the fundamental
characteristics of the capitalist science and power structure is that it
presents itself as having no history. In order to claim being the ultimate
and final system, it is important to have no history and no location. But
history cannot be evaded although capitalism may think it will last until
the end of time—many other forces of civilization had also made similar
claims. Let me just underline the main thesis of this section of my work:
The state-civilization system, which came into existence on the basis of
the intertwined formations of class, city and state, has multiplied itself up
until the financial stage, the last phase of capitalism, basing itself mostly on
the exploitation and oppression of agricultural and village communities
and, later, urban workers. If the five thousand year old state-civilization
is able to continue its existence in the face of democratic civilization,

197

i
Manifesto for a Democratic Civilization

this will be essentially due to its ideological hegemony. Systems based
on coercion and tyranny can only be successful if they have ideological
hegemony. Thus, the main conflict is not only one of class division but
also one at civilizational level. The historical struggle, that can be traced
back to at least five thousand years, is essentially one between state-
civilization and democratic civilization; the latter consisting of pre-state
village and agricultural communities. All ideological, military, political
and economic relationships, conflicts and struggles occur under these
two main systems of civilization.

We are now ready to deal with capitalism as our next topic. In the
upcoming sections of Book II, I will attempt an evaluation of my main
thesis as set out above and how it is to be interpreted with regard to the
Middle East and Kurdistan.

198

 

 
Notes

Introduction

L.

® N o W

“The main dimension of Turkish-Israeli relations is military. Landmark agreements on
military cooperation in February 1996 and on military industrial cooperation in April
1996 have produced unprecedented military exercises and training, arms sales, and
strategic talks.” Carol Migdalovitz, Israeli-Turkish Relations (1998).

In September 1958 Syria accused Turkey of massing troops on the Syrian-Turkish
border with the intent of executing a U.S.-backed attack on Syria.

As I said during my interrogation to the representatives of the four main institutions of
Turkey (the Intelligence Service of the Chief of Staff, the National Intelligence Service, the
Security General Directorate, and the Intelligenceof the gendarmerie) they had no reason to
celebrate my capture. I told them they did not take part in a brave fight but in a conspiracy.
The Grand Chamber of the European Court of Human Rights (ECtHR) had deemed the
1999 trial on Imrali unfair and recommended a retrial.

All these titles are available at http://ocalan-books.com/english/

In Defense of the People has not yet been published in English.

Assize Courts are the remnant of the former State Security Courts.

Ocalan completed the work with a fifth volume, dealing broadly with the practical
implementation of these concepts, especially that of democratic nation. The five volumes

were published in Turkish between 2009 and 2012.

Section 1

His most famous statement, found in §7 of part I of Principles of Philosophy (1644) and
in part IV of Discourse on the Method (1637).

Francis Bacon links knowledge and power in The New Organon (1620).

The Persian Sufi was tortured and publicly crucified in 922 CE by the Abbasid rulers
for his alleged heresy. As for Giordano Bruno, it is not clear whether this Italian
mathematician and astrolog.er was burned at the stake in 1600 for his pantheistic
religious believes or for his cosmology.

Democritus was one of the two founders of the ancient atomist theory. He elaborated

 
 

199

 
 
Manifesto for a Democratic Civilization

a system originated by his teacher Leucippus into a materialist account of the natural
world. The atomists held that there are miniscule, indivisible bodies from which
everything else is composed, and that these move about in an infinite void.

5. ‘These speculations are aimed at opening our horizons, at shedding the unsound aspects
of a methodology and distorted knowledge and belief systems produced by powers
of state and society. They formed our thought structure with their lies and tools of
distortion and to a great extent destroyed our ability for sound reasoning.

6. An example of such a cell is seen in the Euglena, which is a present-day unicellular
organism. It has properties both of animals—it does move and it takes food from the
environment when there is not sufficient light around for it to photosynthesize but when
there is sufficient light, it will photosynthesize and produce its own food.

7. 1 will go into more detail about sex and reproduction in the human society at a later
stage, but for now, suffice it to say that the pleasure obtained from sexual activity
should not be confused with love. On the contrary, pleasure based purely on physical
sex is denial of love. Capitalist modernity is destroying society in the name of love by
advocating physical, loveless sex. Sexual lust is related to the loss of freedom. Love can
only be achieved in freedom and morality. Real love is the great excitement experienced
from the universal creation. Mawland’s saying, “Love is all there is in the universe, the
rest is frivolous” is the true interpretation of love: the awareness of the bond between all
elements in the universe, delighting in the harmony of creation.

8. Once again, light comes into play here because sight is impossible without light.

9. Verse 56 in sura 51 in the Qurian reads: “And I did not create the jinn and mankind
except to worship Me” A common interpretation is that “to worship” here means “to
know” A hadith reads: “I was a hidden treasure, and I wished to be known, so I created
a creation (mankind), then made Myself known to them, and they recognized Me."
(Keshfu'l-hafa, 11, 132, Hadis: 2016).

10. Nietzsche developed this concept in Thus Spoke Zarathustra (1883).

11. The French philosopher, mathematician, physicist and writer Descartes spent most of
his adult life in the Dutch Republic.

12. This concept was developed by Fernand Braudel, which is “proportionate to individuals,
to daily life, to our illusions, to our hasty awareness—above all the time of the chronicle
and the journalist. Social science has almost what amounts to a horror of the event. And
not without some justification for the short time span is the most capricious and the

most delusive of all” On History (1980), p. 28.

 
Notes

13. Braudel used this concept to stress the slow, often imperceptible effects of space, climate,
and technology on the actions of human beings.

14. See the works of Elisée Reclus and Murray Bookchin.

15. See Aristotle, The Politics, 1253al-3.

16. Scientism claims that science alone can render truth about the world and reality. It deems
it necessary to do away with most, if not all, metaphysical, philosophical, and religious
claims, as the truths they proclaim cannot be apprehended by the scientific method. In
essence, scientism sees science as the absolute and justifiable access to the truth.

17. See Genealogy of Morality (1887) Part 1§11 and Thus Spoke Zarathustra.

18. Fernand Braudel, The Mediterranean and The Mediterranean World in the Age of Phillip
11 (1949).

19. Theodor Adorno, Minima Moralia: Reflections From Damaged Life (1951), p. 39. Adorno
maintains that it is no longer possible to live a good, honest life because we live in an
inhuman society.

20. Michel Foucault, The Order of Things: An Archaeology of the Human Sciences (1966).

21. We do not see resistance against capitalist modernity in iany other cultural area besides
the Middle East. Those that did resist could not escape elimination. ‘

22. Coined and described by Maria Mies in Patriarchy and Capital Accumulation on a
World Scale (1999), Chapter 3: “Housewifization means the externalization, or ex-
territorialization of costs which otherwise would have to be covered by the capitalists. This
means women's labor is considered a natural resource, freely available like air and water.
Housewifization means at the same time the total atomization and disorganization of
these hidden workers. This is not only the reason for the lack of women's political power,
but also for their lack of bargaining power. As the housewife is linked to the wage-earning
breadwinner, to the ‘free’ proletarian as a non-free worker, the ‘freedom’ of the proletarian
to sell his labor power is based on the non-freedom of the housewife. Proletarianization of
men is based on the housewifization of women.” (p. 110).

23. Hitler likens the society to a wife.

! 24. In Leviathan (1651), Thomas Hobbes uses these words to denote pre-capitalist society.

Section 2

I. Editor’s note: Genetic evidence that has come to light since the writing of this manuscript,
indicates that all descendents of the humans who had left Africa during the first migratory
wave, about 125,000 years ago, died out before the second migration out of Africa. The

201

h
Manifesto for a Democratic Civilization

evidence indicates that the second migration took place about 85,000 years ago, when
one group of humans, consisting of a few hundred individuals, left East Africa in a single
exodus. Their mitochondrial DNA shows that all non-Africans are descendent from one
woman, the “Out-of-Africa Eve” See Stephen Oppenheimer, Out of Eden (2004).

2. ‘Thousands of rock paintings and carved stones can be found at the Trigin alp, Gevaruk
alp and Pegtazare, all located in the Hakkari province.

3, There is a hypothesis that groups that acquired a symbolic, referential communication
system, which united them through shared concepts, could not remain in constrictive
clan groups for long and, furthermore, that they possessed the dynamics to transform
themselves into a more advanced form of societal organization.

4. V. Gordon Childe hinted at the importance of this cultural era when he remarked that |
the Neolithic era in this region is no less important than the four hundred year old
culture of Western Europe in his book called The Dawn of European Civilization (1925).

5. The Hyksos were a group of mixed Semitic-Asiatics who settled in northern Egypt
during the 18th century BCE. In about 1630 they seized power and Hyksos kings ruled
Egypt as the 15th dynasty (c. 1630-1521 BCE).

6. See “The Indian Stone Age Sequence” by Bridget Allchin in The Journal of the Royal
Anthropological Institute of Great Britain and Ireland, Vol. 93, No. 2 (July-Dec. 1963).

7. Positivism can be defined as any philosophical system that confines itself to the data
of experience, that excludes a priori or metaphysical speculations and emphasizes the
achievements of science. See Section I of this book for Ocalan’s critique of positivism. |

8. Michel Foucault, The Order of Things: An Archaeology of the Human Sciences (1970).

9. Itis an encompassing concept that refers to the very slow movement of historical time.
Indeed, it represents a temporal rhythm so slow and stable that it approximates physical
geography. It forms at the interface of the natural physical world and human social ‘
activity—of physical space and human space. The longue durée provides the unifying
element of human history. The theoretical assumption supporting Braudel's concept is
a human history formed through the “structures of the longue durée” Humans make
their history in space and in time. Thus, Braudel’s concept emphasizes the physical
characteristics of the earth, geography, natural resources, material processes and culture
as constitutive elements of human history.

10. Francis Fukuyama, The End of History and the Last Man (1992).

11. Fernand Braudel, On History (1982).

 

12. The medium is called conjuncture or medium term socio-economic cycles by Braudel.

202 |

 
Notes

See The Mediterranean and the Mediterranean World in the Age of Philip II. Braudel’s
own great contribution saw time as a social—more than as a physical—phenomenon,
whence the idea of a plurality of social times. The great trinity that Braudel constructed
and used as the framework for his book on the Mediterranean was structure,
conjoncture, événement: long-term, very slowly evolving structures; medium-term,
fluctuating cyclical processes; and short-term, ephemeral, highly visible events.

13. V. Gordon Childe coined the term “Neolithic revolution” in 1923 to denote a period of
important innovations like agriculture.

14. When the possibilities of class division combined with that of urbanization, any one of
the dynastic and hierarchic groups in the area could have made the transition to being
a “state” organization through mobilising the resources of the “strong man.” Not only
Lower Mesopotamia, but also Upper and Middle Mesopotamia witnessed numerous
such attempts. Although some of them have become permanent others have not due to
the conditions of the time.

15. Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels quoted Charles Fourier like this in their work, The Holy
Family (1844).

16. The Nur Mountains lie at the south-western end of the Taurus range.

Section 3

1. Any object that has an importance in the clan's life can be the totem. Usually it is based on
an entity that also embodies power. To date we still come across tribes named after lions,
snakes, falcons, wolfs, the sun, rain, wind and names of important plants and trees.

. 2. See Samuel Noah Kramer and John Maier, Myths of Enki, the Crafty God (1989).

3. AsI have argued before, in my opinion this does not signify a backward mental state; on
the contrary, it is probably more progressive and closer to the truth than the modernistic
view of nature as being a lifeless object.

4. The woman figures of the mother-goddess period were much more modest, symbolizing
the productive and fertile woma;.

5. In Sumerian mythology the Mes are divine decrees underlying the social institutions,
religious practices, technology, behavior, mores and human conditions that constituted
civﬁization, as understood by the Sumerians. They are fundamental to the Sumerian
understanding of the relationship between humanity and the gods.

6. Guenther Roth and Claus Wittich, Max Weber: Economy and society, Volume 1 (1978).

7. In Turkish, a common name for brothels is public house. Therefore, public prostitute

203

h
Manifesto for a Democratic Civilization

10.

11.

12.

13.

14,

15.

16.

17.

18.

refers to prostitutes in a brothel and private prostitute to wives in a patriarchal marriage.
Although widely quoted as slaughterhouse Hegel actually used the word slaughter-bench
or Schlachtbank in his Lectures on the Philosophy of History (1825-26).

Editor’s note: The houri are dark-eyed virgins of perfect beauty believed to live in
Paradise with the blessed.

Peter A. Kropotkin, Selected Writings on Anarchism and Revolution, edited and
translated by Martin A. Miller (1970.)

It is difficult to draw the borders between science and philosophy. One can think of
them as being theoretical and practical aspects of the same phenomenon.

Fernand Braudel’s right and just interpretation. '
Catalhdyiik, the largest and best preserved Neolithic site found to date, existed from
approximately 7500 BCE to 5700 BCE.

The ethnic origins of the Urartu kings are not clear. This is true for all the dynasties,
since they all used the dominant culture and language of the time. Hence, in Urartu and -
later in the Persian palaces, Assyrian and Aramaic were the official state languages.

In fact, the period of the Gutian invasions (2,150 to 2,050), the Kassit invasion (around
1,600 BCE) and the Median and Persian counter-expansions indeed point to this.
Archeological work began at the Kazane mound in 1992 by Patricia Wattenmaker;
Timothy Matnet led the work at the mound Titrig between 1991-1999; Gre Virike was
first discovered by Guillermo Algaze and his team 1989; and the mound of Zeytinlibahge
was discovered by Guillermo Algaze in 1998. Archeological work began in 1999 under

the leadership of Marcella Frangipane for the Rescuing Archeologic and Cultural Assets
Project as they would fall in the catchment area of the Ilisu and Karkamig Dams.

Editor’s note: It seems that some of these sites originated in an even earlier time. Gobekli
Tepe was erected by hunter-gatherers (who lived in villages for part of the year) about
11,500 years ago—before the advent of sedentism. Some scholars suggest that the
Neolithic agricultural revolution took place here. They suggest that different nomadic
groups cooperated to protect concentrations of wild cereals. See Klaus Schmidt: Sie
bauten die ersten Tempel. Das riitselhafte Heiligtum der Steinzeitjdger (2006).

Editor’s note: This seems to be the case indeed. It seems that the erection of monumental
complexes was within the capacities of hunter-gatherers, and not only of sedentary
farming communities as had been previously assumed. In this way, Gobekli Tepe

profoundly changes our understanding of a crucial stage in the development of human

societies:. As excavator Klaus Schmidt concludes: ‘First came the temple, then the city”

 
19.
20.

21.

22,
23.
24,

-

26.

27.

28.

29.

30.

31

32.

33.

34.

35.

36.

Notes

The Kurdish equivalent to Washukanni, Bashkani, means “charming and beautiful fountain”
Proof of this may be the written treaty between the Hittite king Suppiluliuma I, who had
conquered Aleppo and Carcemish, and the Mitanni prince Shattiwaza, his son-in-law.
Troy was either a Hittite establishment or a close ally and a unique city civilization from
the same cultural group. The dwellers of Ahhiyawa can be seen as belonging to the
Aryans who were influenced by Anatolia or who migrated around 1,800 BCE. I believe
that it is a mistaken claim that they had European origins from the north. The same
mistake is made with regards to the Hittites.The Cilician state was located south of the
central Anatolian plateau in the time of the Hittites (bordering on the Taurus Mountains
in the north and east and the Mediterranean in the west).

It also reflects an alliance amongst the governors.

After the battle of Kadesh near the river Orontes and the city of Hama.

It has been suggested that Nefertiti, the chief consort of Akhenaton, was the Mitanni
princess Tadukhiba.

The Assyrian word Nairdi was used to refer to both the land and the people around Lake
Van. It means “people of the rivers and streams.” |

Guda, Gudea and Got probably all originated from this god’s name. What Allah means
for the Semitics, Guda means for the Aryans. Literally it means “to come into being by
itself” It is still used by the Kurds and Iranians rather than “Allah”

Probably located near modern Bradost region in South Kurdistan.

Similar to the culture of the god Dionysus in the ancient Greek culture.

The period from 521 to 506 BCE.

The Medes always had been second in power and a fundamental force in the army.
Being relatives of the Persians may have had a role in this.

The initial longest road known in history, the King's Road, starting from the Aegean
shores of Sard and ending in Persepolis.

Serug in Hebrew, the name of the great-grandfather of the prophet Abraham.

From 70 BCE to the year 70.

“Rabbi” means religious teacher, while “nabi” means"prophet” or “God’s emissary.”
With Jesus, Judas did the betraying; with me, this role was played by the alliance of
MOSSAD and the CIA.

According to Oxford’ Dictionary of Sociology (1998), the “center-periphery (or
core-periphery) model is a spatial metaphor which describes and attempts to explain

the structural relationship between the advanced or metropolitan ‘center’ and a less

205

 
Manifesto for a Democratic Civilization

37.

38.

39.

41.

42.
43,

45,
46.

47.

48.

49,

50.

51.

52.

55,

54.

developed ‘periphery, either within a particular country, or (more commonly) as
applied to the relationship between capitalist and developing societies. The former usage
is common in political geography, political sociology, and studies of labor-markets.” This
model is important in the world system theory of Wallerstein and Andre Gunder Frank,
to name but a few.

A kind of a version of the Hebrew’s Sacred Book, the Torah, but much longer and
more complex.

Confucius in China, Socrates in Greece, Zoroaster in the Medo-Persian Empire.
Although there are different historical interpretations, the most logical one would be
right after a glacier period, which coincides with this date.

The sacrificing of humans to gods is not unique to these civilizations.

See David Wilkinson's idea of a “Central Civilization” in: Andre Gunder Frank and
Barry K. Gills, eds., The World System: Five Hundred Years or Five Thousand? (1994).
3,000 to 1,200 BCE.

This term refers to a confederacy of seafaring raiders of the second millennium BCE who

sailed into the eastern Mediterranean and attempted to invade Egyptian territory as well.

. The heroic wars of this long period of settlement—and especially the events around

Troy—were told in Homer's great epics. The Odyssey tells the stories of island settlement.
Mycenae grew from a settlement started about 2,000 BCE.

Antiochus I was king of the Commagene Kingdom that had its capital at Samosata
(modern day Samsat).

Pythagoras and his group, around 500 BCE.

A town and district of Urfa in Turkey on the river Euphrates.

Whether state or private property, all the values seized, after the people who work on the
property are fed, are justified by the fact that property is owned.

For Fernand Braudel’s analysis, see The Wheels of Commerce (1983).

The Sociology of Freedom is volume three of The Manifesto for a Democratic Civilization.
Murray Bookchin, The Ecology of Freedom: The Emergence and Dissolution of Hierarchy
(1982).

Inanna is the Sumerian goddess of sexual love, fertility and warfare. This mythological
tale from Sumer features the struggle of Inanna against the male god Enki, whom she
accuses of having seized everything that has value to society and that is rightfully hers.
Marcion (65-160) was the first to introduce a Christian canon of books. The so-called
Bible of Marcion excluded all the books of the Hebrew Bible on the grounds that the

 

 
55.

56.

S

58.
59.
60.

Notes

“vengeful” god of Abraham and the Hebrew Bible could not have been the same as God
the Father of Jesus.

Constantine’s edict of tolerance was issued in 313, in 380 Emperor Theodosius I promulgated
the Edict of Thessalonica, declaring Nicene Christianity the state’s official religion.

Until the 7th century Arianism was widespread in central and south-eastern Europe,
especially among Germanic tribes like the Goths. Arian Christians held that only the
Father was God.

Before Islam Arabic communities were governed along tribal affiliations and kinship
ties. Muhammed developed the ummah idea, which is not only for Arabs but universal.
Accordingly, the purpose of the ummah was to be based on religion rather than kinship.
Therefore it is like a commonwealth of believers.

Max Weber, The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism (1905).

[bid., Chapter IV. '

For the “thousand year reign of peace,” see Revelations 20 in the Christian Bible.

 
Index

Aaron 141

Abraham 41, 137, 141-142, 177-178, 184-
185, 189, 205, 207

Abrahamic religions 98, 100, 137, 142,
177, 185, 189

Abyssinia 136

139, 157

46-47

61, 80, 90

139-140, 151-153, 159, 187, 205

Aeneid 164

Aeolian tribes 151

Achaemenid Empire
action-reaction principle
Adorno, Theodor

Aegean

aesthetics 57
Africa 70-71,73,77-79, 148, 150, 159,
195, 201

Ahhiyawa 134, 151, 205
136, 205

Akkad, Curse of 131

al-Assad, Hafez 2

al-Hallaj, Mansur 41

Alevi 186

Akhenaton

Alexander the Great
Amenemhat 135
America, North  147-148, 150
147-148, 150, 174
76, 143, 178, 183, 197
Amun 136

analytical intelligence 41, 53-54
anarchist schools 63

Anatolia 25, 124, 159, 205

animal kingdom 47, 49, 50, 53

80, 146

America, South

Amorite

32, 36, 45-47,99
Apiru 143 )
Arabs 30, 148, 178, 188-189, 197, 207 4
Arameans 76, 133
Aras valleys 137
35, 58, 141, 154, 156, 196
armed struggle 23-24
Armenians 30, 186
arts 42, 56-57, 65, 72, 75, 85, 87, 95, 98,
111, 118, 121-122, 124, 125, 150, 155
Aryan 15-16, 73-79, 89, 106, 132, 134-135,
138, 140-141, 144-145, 158, 178, 205
Ashoka 146
Agkava 134
Assize Court 26, 199
138, 140, 170, 178
Assyrians 76, 105, 131-134, 136-138, 140,
142, 149-150, 177-178, 186, 204-205

animate

Aristotle

Assur

Astyages, King 139

Athens 19,23, 123-124, 152-153, 155,
156, 158-160, 164

Atoms 44

Augustus, Emperor 161, 184

Babylon 76, 93, 103, 131-133, 137, 140-
142, 149, 150-151, 156, 178

35-36, 44, 51, 66, 199

Bacon, Roger 35-36, 44, 51, 66,

Bakunin, Mikhail 117

Black Sea 73, 132, 156, 158, 163,

Bookchin, Murray 12,62, 174

Bacon, Francis
 

Brahmins 145, 146

Braudel, Fernand 12, 60-61, 81-83, 129,
166, 200-204

Bruno, Giordano 41, 199

Buddha 146, 178, 183

Byzantine Empire 143, 153, 156, 187,
189, 190

Caesar, Julius 160-161

Cairo 135

capitalism 13, 23, 28-29, 35-36, 39-40, 51,
62, 63, 66-67, 94-95, 117, 122, 126-128,
142, 144-145, 147-148, 150, 156, 166,
171, 181, 188, 192, 194-198

capitalist modernity 13, 23-27, 29-31, 37-
43, 47, 50, 52, 59, 60, 62- 69, 74, 80-81,
88, 90, 93-94, 110, 112, 163, 167, 188,
197, 200-201

capitalist society 38, 190, 201

capitalist system  24-25, 38, 42, 51, 60,
128, 180

Cappadocia 132

Cartesian mechanism 38

Carthage 159

Catalhdyiik 130, 204

Caucasia 30, 76, 134, 137, 142, 178

Celtics 148

China 23, 105, 121, 140, 143-146, 174,
182, 206

Christianity 79, 103, 120, 125, 136, 148,
162-163, 166, 178, 181-182, 184-191,
193-196, 206-207

Cilicia 134, 205

citizen 36, 67, 134, 154, 158, 160, 163

Index

civilisation 14

class 13,15, 33-34, 37-38, 53, 83, 85, 95,
100-101, 108-110, 112-115, 117, 119-
123, 125, 127, 145, 154, 157, 159, 166,
172, 174-177, 182, 184, 186, 189, 191,
197-198, 20‘3

classless society 33

Cleopatra 136

commerce 64, 128, 131

Committee of Ministers of the Council of
Europe 26

commodification 29, 64, 105, 127-128, 170

commodity 65, 105, 127

“communal life 61, 90

Confucius 35, 145, 206
constitutionalism 123
Copenhagen Criteria 27
Council of Europe 21, 24, 26, 74
CPT (European Committee for the
Prevention of Torture) 21.

Cyrus the Great 139

Darius 140

Darwinism 48

David 141

democracy 20, 26-28, 123, 147, 154-156, 160
democratic confederalism 30, 68
democratic modernity 60, 63
democratic nation 68, 199

Democratic society 68, 171

Democritus 45, 152, 199

Descartes 35-36, 44, 51, 66, 200
dialectics 34-35, 48, 56, 67, 153, 165, 174
Diocletian, Emperor 162
151-152, 155, 157-158, 161, 164, 168,

174-176, 179, 185-186, 190-192, 195-

196, 203, 205-207

15, 18, 87, 91-92, 99, 102-104, 107,
109, 121, 131, 155, 168, 185, 203, 206

god-king 34, 80, 108, 140, 158

Gothic 143, 162

Goths 141, 143, 148, 161-162, 178, 183,
196, 207

Gobekli Tepe 133, 204

Gre Virike 133, 204

Greece 21-22, 24, 30, 35,78, 116, 121-123,
126, 128, 131, 135, 138-142, 148, 150-
153, 155-159, 161,163-164, 179-180, -
186, 196, 205-206

Gutians 138

goddess

Haldi 137

Hammurabi 123

Harappa 77,105, 150

Harpagus 139

Harran 141

Hattians 134

Hattusa 134

Hatthsili III 135

76, 136, 139, 141-143, 163,
177-178, 184, 190, 195, 205-206

Hegel, Georg W.E 49, 111, 204

Hellenic 153, 157

Herodotus 138-139, 150

Himalayas 147

Hindu 146

134,-136, 150-153, 155, 177, 205

Hobbes, Thomas 67
\

Hebrew

Hittite

. Inanna

Index

housewifization 67, 107, 109, 115-117,
180, 201
24, 27, 124
143, 148, 161-162, 196
29, 132-134, 137-139, 197
76, 135-136, 202

human rights
Huns

Hurrians

Hyksos

72, 80, 82, 132, 144
13, 16, 17, 23-25, 66, 74, 94-95,
106, 114, 121, 153, 174
IMF 27

Ice Age
Ideology

16, 25
Imrali 8, 21, 24-26, 31, 199
Inanimate 36, 38, 45, 47, 128
99, 102-103, 131, 136, 155, 175,
185, 206
75, 78, 144, 146, 150
144-145
61,93, 179
Ineb-Hedg 135

Imperialist

Indian
Indonesia

Industrialism

Inquisition 37

Intellectual 13, 18, 40, 43-44, 52-53, 56,
62, 69, 83, 107, 122, 139, 142, 152, 154

Ionian 140, 151-152

Iran 14, 23, 30, 73, 77, 80, 130, 134, 138,
143, 158, 160, 162, 183-184, 197, 205

Iraq 23, 27, 30, 74, 90, 103, 161

19, 138

Isis 136

Islam 25, 64-65, 76, 80, 89, 100, 120, 148,
156, 163, 181, 182, 184, 188-191, 193-
196, 207

21-24, 30, 131, 177, 190, 199

Itj-Tawi 135

Iron Age

Israel

i | | m
Manifesto for a Democratic Civilization

142, 178, 184-185, 189, 205, 207
30, 161, 189
Judaism 61, 142, 188, 191

Jesus

Jews

Kabhur River 133

Kanesh 132

Karnak 136

Kaska 134

Kassites 131, 138

Kazane 133,204

KCK (Union of Kurdish Communities) 30

KDP (Kurdistan Democratic Party) 22

Kenya 26

Khadijah 189

Kikkuli 133

Knowledge 8, 20, 31-32, 37, 43-46, 50, 53,
55-57, 59-66, 73-74, 78, 80-81, 96, 102,
111,118, 124, 129, 150, 153-154, 156,
166, 172, 183, 199-200

Krishna 146

Kropotkin, Peter 117

Kiiltepe 132

Kurdistan 8, 16, 22-23, 30, 71, 198, 205

Kurds 7,24, 25, 30, 69, 74, 75, 79, 132, 205

Lenin, V.I. 23,117

Leviathan 37, 41, 89, 112, 145, 148
liberalism 23, 25, 29, 62-64, 66-67
libertarian 67

longue durée, la 61, 75, 82-83, 144, 192,202
Luxor 135

Lydians 152

Macedonia 141, 153, 156, 159

212

Magi priests 139

Mani 41,184

Marduk 131

Marmara 156

Marx, Karl 11-12, 23,61, 95, 101, 126, 203

Marxist-Leninism 23

masculinity 99, 109, 116

material culture 140, 157

materialism 12-13, 40, 58-59, 67, 95, 126,
128, 153, 200

matrilineal 107-108, 170

Mecca 189

Medes 132, 138-139, 150, 178, 205

Mediterranean 71, 132-133, 156, 159, 161,
203, 205-206

135-136

Mesopotamia 14, 76, 97, 105-106, 132-
133, 138, 142, 157, 162, 164, 170, 202

17, 35, 40, 44-45, 48, 55-59,
62-63, 66-68, 82, 84, 118, 119, 124-126,
128, 146, 169, 172, 175, 190, 193, 197,
201, 202

Middle Ages

militarism 61

132-134, 136, 205

Mithra 157

Moenjo-daro 77, 105

142, 178, 183, 188-191

money 23, 66, 142, 152, 195

Mongolian 89, 143, 147, 197

35,57, 59, 88, 110, 120, 123, 139-
140, 145-146, 150, 164, 168, 172, 189

Moscow 23, 162 7

100, 137, 141, 177-178, 184, 189

Memphis

metaphysics

34-35, 38, 165, 167, 186

Mitanni

Mohammed

morals

Moses
Mossad 22, 205

Mosul 132

Musasir 139

mythological approach 32-33

mythology 32-33, 39, 52, 155-156, 163, 176

Nabis 142

Nairians 137

21, 23-25, 29-30, 41, 59-60,
64, 68, 81, 85, 93, 120-121, 148

nation-state

national liberation movements 43,63, 118

national question, the 24

nationalism 24, 28, 64, 74, 78, 120

Native American 144, 147

NATO 25

Neolithic  15-18, 24, 33, 72-73, 78-79, 81,
84-85, 87-88, 97, 99-100, 102, 109-110,
118, 121, 124, 126, 128, 130, 133, 135,
139, 144, 145, 146-148, 150, 152-153,
157-160, 165, 166-171, 176, 186-188,
192-193, 195, 197, 202, 203, 204

Netherlands, the 51,128

Nietzsche 43, 60, 91, 200

Nile 130, 135-136, 170

Nimrod 141,177, 190

Nineveh 132

Nippur Lament 131

Nordics 148

Nur mountains 92, 203

objective approach  36-37

Odoacer, King. 162

Odyssey 164, 206

Oghuz tribes 143

-~

Index

Orientalism 63-65

Osiris 136

Ottoman Empire 142-143

Palestine 141

Palmyra 161, 163

Paris Commune, the 112,118

Parthians 14, 157, 160

patriarchy 108

Paul, Saint 41

Pax Romana 161, 163

pederasty 179-181

Pencav 140

153, 157, 163

139-140, 205

14,75,79, 131, 136, 138-142, 146,
149-153, 156-157, 159, 161-162, 177-
178, 183, 195, 199, 204-205

Pharaoh 57,75-76, 103, 135, 137, 141,
176-177, 184, 190

Pharisees 142

76, 151, 155, 159

Pergamum
Persepolis

Persia

Phoenicians

Phrygians 152

PKK (Kurdistan Workers’ Party) 8, 22,
24-25, 27, 31

plant kingdom 48-50

35, 41, 154, 196

political Islam 64, 191

Polytheism 119 |

positivism 13, 58-59, 62-63, 66, 80, 84, 86,
90, 94-96, 99, 111

121, 139, 142, 176-178, 193, 195

Ptolemy 157

PUK (Patriotic Union of Kurdistan) 22

Plato

prophets

213

I : “ \ . —mn
Manifesto for a Democratic Civilization

Pythagoras 151-152, 206

quantum physics 45

rabbi 142, 205

rajah  145-147, 183

Ramses II  135-136

rationality 57, 61

real socialism 117

Red Sea 133,158

Reformation 35, 65, 80, 194

regime of truth 28, 32-69

religion 13,15, 17, 39, 52, 56-57, 59, 64,
66, 72-73, 75, 81-83, 85, 87-88, 95, 98-
100, 103,111-112, 118-125, 136-137,
140, 142, 146, 150, 154, 158, 162, 168,
172, 185-186, 189, 194-197, 207

religious method 32, 34-35

Renaissance 35, 65, 80, 122, 150

republicanism 123

resistance 8, 18, 24, 29, 31, 41, 43, 67, 92,
112, 131-132, 138, 141-142, 156, 165-
166, 175-178, 181, 183-184, 196, 201

revolutionary 8, 11-13, 15-17, 67; 72,117,
155, 158, 190, 192

Rome 23, 123, 136, 143, 155, 158-167,
178-181

Sadducees 142

Samuel 141

Sarduri 137

Saul 141

scientific method 33, 35-38, 43, 94, 201
scientific socialism  37-38, 43, 62

24

scientism 28, 58-59, 90, 200

Scythians 138, 140, 142-143, 148, 161, 178

Seleucid empire 157

self-defence 49

Semitic 15, 72, 75-76, 82, 89, 106, 119,
136, 141, 148, 159, 178, 202

Shapurl 161

slavery 15, 34, 55, 67-68. 91, 102, 182,
191, 193

social science 11-12, 82, 200

socialism 37-38, 43, 62, 67, 74, 94, 103,
113, 117-118, 144, 195

sociology 12, 29, 55, 56, 60, 62, 67, 74, 83,
86-89, 95, 111, 114, 125, 129, 166, 167,
171, 195-196, 206

Sociology of Freedom 12, 29, 86-89, 11,
- 114, 125, 129, 166, 171, 195-196, 206
Socrates 116, 145, 153, 178, 180, 183, 206
Solomon 141
Solon 131,151
Sparta 156
Spartacus 112
structural crisis 62, 67
subject-object}lstinction 67
Sudan 136, 148
Sufism 42,195
Sumer 16, 38, 72, 74-77, 80-81, 89, 96-
110, 113,119, 121-124, 129-146, 149,
152, 155, 157, 166, 176-177, 183, 186,
191, 196, 203, 206

Surug  141-142

Syria  21-23, 133, 137, 157, 161, 185, 199

Taoism 145

i
|
|

 
71, 90) 105, 131'1323 135, l6la 183)
187, 203, 205
technology 66, 68, 111, 201, 203

Taurus

Telipinus 134

Tell Halaf 76-77, 96-97, 102, 124,
Teshup 137

Thales 151-152

Thebes 135-136

Thutmosis, I 133

Thutmosis, Il 133

Tiamat 131
Tigris river 15, 74, 97, 105-106, 129-133,
162, 170

133,204

totalitarian 67

Troy 134, 151, 159, 205, 206

truth 28, 32-69, 117-118, 201

Turkey 7-9, 21-29, 142, 199, 206
Turkmenistan 77, 130

Tushpa 137,139

Titris

Ubaid 106

tibermensch 50

Ummah 64, 190, 207

37,67, 98

| universe 33, 38, 44-51, 54. 56-57, 83, 86,
118, 128, 140, 145, 200

Ur 105, 108, 131, 144, 170

Ur-Nammu, Code of 123

132, 137-140, 149-150, 152, 162, 204

unemployment

Urartu

Urfa 75, 133, 141-142, 163, 206

Uruk 103, 105-106, 108, 130, 144, 147,
150-151, 155, 160, 165

USA™ 21-24, 26-27, 30, 130, 148

Index

USSR 22,27, 57, 62
utopia 23,31, 68, 172, 177, 191, 193-194,

196

Van 137,205

Veda 145
Wallerstein, Immanuel 60-62, 117, 194, 206
Waset 135

Washukanni 133, 205

Weber, Max 61-62, 103, 194

western Europe 35, 65, 79, 124, 202

18, 30, 41-42, 62, 66, 116, 121
world system 34, 50, 61, 118, 148, 206
World Word 11 21

wisdom

Yahweh 141

14,71, 75, 90, 92, 105,
131-132, 135, 137-138, 183, 187

Zenobia 161

Zeugma 162

Zeytinlibahge 133,204

Ziggurat 19, 97-105, 113, 134, 136, 174,
183, 185

35, 139, 145, 178, 183, 206

Zagros mountains

Zoroaster

Zoroastrianism 35

 
 

MANIFESTO FOR A DEMOCRATIC CIVILIZATION $22.95

T TR

Considering the circumstances under which the book was
written, I'd say the achievement here is quite impressive.
Abdullah Ocalan seems to have done a better job writing with
the extremely limited resources allowed him by his jailers than
authors like Francis Fukuyama or Jared Diamond did with
access to the world’s finest research libraries.

—David Graeber

A criticism that limits itself to capitalism is too superficial,
Ocalan argues, and turns his eyes to the underlying structures
of civilization. Rethinking the methods of understanding
culture, politics, and society, he provides the tools for what he
calls a sociology of freedom.

Civilization: The Age of Masked Gods and Disguised Kings is
the first book in a new five-volume work called Manifesto for a
Democratic Civilization.

In this work, Abdullah Ocalan distills 35 years of revolutionary
theory and praxis and 10 years of solitary confinement in
Turkish prisons. These reflections represent the essence of his
ideas on society, knowledge, and power.

 

ISBN 9788293064428

 

 

 

0l

NN

I

 

 

